Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 1 - 
 CHAPTER – 5 
 
THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE  
 
 
CELL  
 
Cell is called the fundamental unit of life.  
A cell is capable of independent existence and can carry out all the functions w hich are 
necessary for a living being. A cell carries out nutrition, respiration, excretion, transportation 
and reproduction; the way an individual organism does. Unicellular organisms are capable of 
independent existence which shows a cell’s capability to  exist independently. Due to this, a cell 
is called the fundamental and structural unit of life. All living beings are composed of the basic 
unit of life, i.e. cell.  
 
CELL THEORY (Schleiden, Schwann and Virchow):  
• All living organisms are composed of one  or more cells.  
• The cell is the basic unit of structure, function, and organization in all organisms.  
• All cells come from preexisting, living cells.  
 
CELL SIZE, SHAPE AND NUMBER  
 
There is much variation in size, shape and number of cells in different o rganisms, and also in 
various parts of the body. Most of the cells are only a few micrometres in diameter and are 
visible only with the help of a microscope.  
Cells may be spherical, spindle shaped, elongated, polyhedral or irregular in shape. The shape 
of the cells is determined by the specific function they perform.  
The number of cells is related to the size of the organ or body. Thus, small organisms have 
limited number of cells, while the larger ones such as elephant, whale or banyan tree have a 
countle ss number of cells.  
 
Some organisms can also have cells of different kinds. Look at the following picture. It depicts 
some cells from the human body.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 2 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 59  
 
Q1. Who discovered cells, and how?  
Answer:  Cells were discovered in 1665 by an English Botanist, Robert Hooke. He used a 
primitive microscope to observe cells in a cork slice.  
 
Q2. Why is the cell called the structural and functional unit of life?  
Answer: Cells constitute various components of plants and animals. A cell is the smallest unit 
of life and is capable of all living functions. Cells are the building blocks of life. This is the 
reason why cells are referred to as the basic structural and functional units of life. All cells var y 
in their shape, size, and activity they p erform. In fact, the shape and size of the cell is related to 
the specific functions they perform.  
 
STRUCTURE OF CELL  
 
PROTOPLASM  
 
A cell is made of life giving substance called protoplasm. The protoplasm is a highly organised 
jelly like, viscous, semiflui d, composed of molecules of various chemicals. Most of these are 
organic molecules such as  proteins, carbohydrates,  fats, nucleic acid etc.  Protoplasm is 
commonly  called the ‘physical basis  of life ’. 
A plant cell consists of  a cell wall and protoplast.  Cell wall is absent in  animal cells. Protoplast  
denotes the whole of  protoplasm present in a  cell. It is differentiated  into plasma membrane,  
nucleus and cytoplasm.  
 
PLASMA MEMBRANE  
 
Plasma membrane is a semi -permeable membrane. It is composed of bilayer of l ipid and 
protein. This is the outermost covering of the cell that separates the contents of the cell from its  
external environment. The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some 
materials in and out of the cell. It also prevents movement  of  s om e  oth e r m a te ri a l s . Th e  c e l l  
membrane, therefore, is called a selectively permeable membrane.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 3 - 
 Functions of Plasma Membrane  
Plasma membrane selectively  regulates the entry and exit of the  substances into and out of 
the cell.  Therefore, it is called a selectively  permeable membrane or semipermeable 
membrane.  
It provides an outer boundary to the cell and protects the cell from injury.  
It allows the flow of materials and information between different organelles of the same 
cell, as well as between the a djacent cells.  
It provides some organic connections between the adjacent cells.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 61  
 
Q1. How do substances like CO 2 and water move in and out of the cell? Discuss.  
Answer:  
The cell membrane is selectively permeable and regulates themovement of substances in and 
out of the cell.  
 
Movement of CO 2:  CO 2 is produced during cellular respiration. Therefore, it is present in 
high concentrations inside the cell. This CO 2 must be excreted out of the cell. In the cell’s 
external environmen t, the concentration of CO 2 is low as compared to that inside the cell. 
Therefore, according to the principle of diffusion, CO 2 moves from a region of higher 
concentration (inside the cell) towards a region of lower concentration (outside the cell). 
Simila rly, O 2 enters the cell by the process of diffusion when the concentration of O 2 inside the 
cell is low as compared to its surroundings.  
 
Movement of water:  Water moves from a region of high concentration to a region of low 
concentration through the plas ma membrane. The plasma membrane acts as a semi -permeable 
membrane, and this movement of water is known as osmosis. However, the movement of water 
across the plasma membrane of the cell is affected by the amount of substance dissolved in 
water.  
 
Q2. Why is  the plasma membrane called a selectively permeable membrane?  
Answer: The cell membraneor the plasma membraneis known as a selectively permeable 
membrane because it regulates the movement of substances in and out of the cell. This means 
that the plasma mem brane allows the entry of only some substances and prevents the 
movement of some other materials.  
 
CELL WALL  
 
Cell wall is made of cellulose. Cell wall is present only in plant cells. It is a rigid protective 
covering outside the plasma membrane. Presence of cell wall in plant cells distinguishes them 
from animal cells. Most of the plant cell walls are made of cellulose.  
 
The cell wall consists of three layers namely, middle lamella, primary wall and secondary wall. 
The middle lamella is a thin amorphous c ement like layer between two adjacent cells. Primary 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 4 - 
 wall is the first formed wall of the cell and is produced inner to the middle lamella. The 
secondary wall is a thick layer found inner to the primary wall.  
 
Functions of Cell Wall:  
Cell wall gives a defi nite shape to the plant cells.  
It provides mechanical strength to the cell.  
It protects the protoplasm against injury.  
It gives rigidity to the cell.  
 
CYTOPLASM  
 
A cell is enclosed in a membranous casing and is filled with a liquid substance which is calle d 
the cytoplasm. There are many cell organelles in a typical cell. Some of the main structures of 
a cell are as follows: The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the plasma membrane. It also 
contains many specialised cell organelles. Each of these organel les performs a specific function 
for the cell.  
 
Functions of Cytoplasm  
Cytoplasm helps in intracellular  distribution of enzymes, nutrients and  other biomolecules 
within the cell.   
Synthesis of different types of  biomolecules such as proteins,  nucleotides, fatty acids etc., 
takes  place in the cytoplasm.  
 
NUCLEUS  
 
Nucleus is the major central structure  in the cell. It is a dense spherical structure  embedded in 
the cytoplasm. Nucleus has  a double membraned envelope called  nuclear envelope. Nuclear 
envelope  encloses a ground substance called  nucleoplasm or  karyolymph. The nuclear  
envelope possesses many pores called  nuclear pores.  
 
The nucleoplasm has two types of  nuclear structures i) the nucleolus and, ii)  chromatin.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 5 - 
  
The nucleolus is a spherical body  rich in protein and RNA. It is the site of  ribosome formation. 
There may be one  or more nucleoli in the nucleoplasm.  The chromatin is a network of fine 
threads composed of genetic material DNA (Deoxyribo nucleic acid) and proteins. During cell 
division chromati n is condensed into thick cord like  structures called Chromosomes. The 
chromosomes contain genes and each gene is responsible for one hereditary character of the 
organism. Genes contain information for inheritance of features from parents to next 
generatio n in the form of DNA molecule.  
 
Functions of Nucleus:  
i) Nucleus controls all the metabolic activities of the cell.  
ii) It controls the inheritance of characters from parents to off -springs.  
iii) It controls cell division.  
 
PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES  
 
Base d on the complexity of organization, especially nuclear organization, the cells  
are classified into two types.  
i) Prokaryotic cells.  
ii) Eukaryotic cells.  
 
PROKARYOTIC CELLS  
 
The cells of Bacteria and Cyano  Bacteria (blue green algae) lack a  well organised  nucleus and 
are called  prokaryotic cells. Their DNA (Deoxyribo  Nucleic Acid) is not enclosed by a nuclear  
membrane. They also lack membrane  bound organelles. The organisms which  possess 
prokaryotic cells are called  prokaryotic organisms or prokaryotes.  They are considered to be 
primitive  organisms.  
 
EUKARYOTIC CELLS  
 
The cells of all plants (except bacteria  and cyano bacteria) and animals possess  a well 
organised nucleus and are called  Eukaryotic cells. Their genetic material is  enclosed by a 
nuclear memb rane. They  possess membrane bound organelles  like Endoplasmic reticulum, 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 6 - 
 golgi body,  mitochondria, plastids and vacuoles.  The organisms which possess  eukaryotic cells 
are called Eukaryotic  organisms or eukaryotes.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 63  
 
Q1. Fill i n the gaps in the following table illustrating differences between prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic cells.  
Prokaryotic Cell  Eukaryotic Cell  
1. Size : generally small ( 1 -10 μm)  
1 μm = 10–6 m 
 
2. Nuclear region: _______________  
_______________  and known as 
_______________  
3. Chromosome: single  
  
4. Membrane -bound  cell organelles absent  1. Size: generally large ( 5 -100 μm) 
 
 
2. Nuclear reg ion: well defined and 
surrounded by a nuclear membrane  
 
3. More than one chromosome  
 
4. _______________  
_________________  
_________________  
 
Answer:  
Prokaryotic Cell  Eukaryotic Cell  
1. Size : generally small ( 1 -10 μm)  
1 μm = 10–6 m 
 
2. Nuclear region: poorly defined because 
of the absence of a nuclear membrane , and 
is known as nucleoid  
3. Chromosome: single  
  
4. Membrane -bound  cell organelles absent  1. Size: generally large ( 5 -100 μm) 
 
 
2. Nuclear region: well defined and 
surrounded by a nuclear memb rane 
 
3. More than one chromosome  
 
4. Membrane -bound cell organelles 
such as mitochondria, plastids, etc., 
are present  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 7 - 
 CELL ORGANELLES  
A cell performs a variety of functions such as i) Synthesis of complex molecules and their 
breakdown, ii) Production of  energy, iii) Secretion of certain substances, etc.. These activities 
of the cell are performed by different cell organelles. These organelles are enclosed by 
membranes. To understand the functioning of the cell, it is necessary to know briefly about the 
structure of cell organelles.  
 
ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM  
 
Endoplasmic reticulum is a complicated and interconnected system of membrane bound 
channels and tubules.  
It is spread throughout the cytoplasm and is continuous with the plasma membrane and nuclear 
membr ane. 
There are two types of Endoplasmic Reticulum.  
a) Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum. (RER)  
b) Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum. (SER)  
 
Rough endoplasmic reticulum  (Granular endoplasmic reticulum)  
They are found in cells which  synthesize proteins. This type of  endoplasmic reticulum 
possesses rough  walls because the ribosomes remain  attached with membrane of endoplasmic  
reticulum.  
 
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum  (Agranular endoplasmic reticulum)  
They are found in cells which  synthesize lipid. The walls are smooth  and r i b o s o m e s  a r e  n o t  
attached to its  membrane.  
 
Functions  of Endoplasmic Reticulum  
Endoplasmic Reticulum (E.R)  provides large surface area for the  metabolic activities of the 
cell. 
Rough endoplasmic reticulum plays  an important role in protein synthesis.  
Smooth endoplasmic reticulum is  involved in the synthesis of steroid,  hormones and lipids.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 8 - 
 GOLGI COMPLEX OR GOLGI APPARATUS  
 
The Golgi apparatus was first described by Camillo Golgi. Golgi complex consist of saucer -
like compartments called cisternae, networ k of interconnecting tubules, vesicles and vacuoles 
at the peripheral regions. In plant cells, Golgi apparatus is referred to as dictyosomes.  
 
Functions of Golgi Complex  
Golgi apparatus is involved in the formation of lysosomes.  
It is also responsible for  the synthesis of cell wall and cell membrane.  
 
LYSOSOMES  
 
Lysosomes are small membrane bound vesicles which contain various types of digestive 
enzymes. These serve as intracellular digestive system, hence they are called digestive bags.  
They are produced by the joint activity of Endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus. If the 
membrane of Lysosome happens to get ruptured, the enzymes of Lysosome would digest the 
entire cellular structure causing death of the cell. So Lysosomes are called ‘suicide bags ’. 
 
Functions  of Lysosomes  
Lysosomes are involved in the  intracellular digestion of food  particles ingested by the cell  
through endocytosis.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 9 - 
 The lysosomes of WBCs (White  blood cells) destroy pathogens  and other foreign particles 
and thus take part in natural defence of  the body.  
 
RIBOSOMES  
 
Ribosomes are small granular  structures made up of ribo nucleic acids  (RNA) and proteins. 
They occur free in  the cytoplasm as well as attached to the  outer surface of the rough 
endoplasmic  reticulum. Each ribosome consists of two subunits – a small subunit and a  large 
subunit. At the time of protein  synthesis many ribosomes get attached  to messenger RNA and 
form a structure  called polyribosome or polysome.  
 
 
Functions  of Ribosomes  
Ribosomes play an important role in  protei n synthesis. So they are called,  ‘protein factories ’ 
of the cell.  
 
VACUOLES  
 
Vacuoles are fluid – filled sacs bound by a single membrane and are present in plant cells as 
well as in certain protozoans as food vacuoles and contractile vacuoles. In plant cell s, major 
portion of the cell is occupied by vacuoles and are bound by the definite membrane called 
tonoplast.  
Vacuoles of plants are filled with cell sap containing minerals, sugars, amino acids and 
dissolved waste products.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 10 - 
 Functions of Vacuoles  
Vacuoles  store and concentrate mineral salts as well as nutrients.  
They maintain proper osmotic pressure in the cell for its turgidity and absorption of water.  
 
 
MITOCHONDRIA  
 
Mitochondria are globular or cylindrical organelles. Each mitochondrion is bound by two  
membranes – an outer continuous membrane and an inner membrane thrown into folds called 
cristae. These cristae divide the inner chamber incompletely. The inner chamber is filled with 
homogenous dense material called the matrix. The cristae have pin headed  bodies called F1 
particles or Oxysomes which play an important role in respiration.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 11 - 
  
The matrix of mitochondria contains enzymes necessary for the oxidation of food during 
respiration and release of energy in the form of ATP molecules. Therefore mitoch ondria are 
called power houses of the cell. The mitochondria contain proteins, lipids and a small amount 
of DNA.  
 
Functions of Mitochondria  
Mitochondria synthesize energy rich compounds such as ATP.  
Mitochondria provide important intermediates for the synt hesis of several biochemicals 
like chlorophyll, cytochromes, steroids,  aminoacids etc.  
 
PLASTIDS  
 
Plastids are disc or oval shaped organelles which occur in plant cells only. Plastids are of three 
types. They are Leucoplasts, Chromoplasts and Chloroplasts.  
i) Leucoplasts: These are colourless plastids which store food in the form of starch, lipids and 
proteins  
ii) Chromoplasts: These are yellow or reddish in colour due to the presence of pigments other 
than chlorophyll. Chromoplasts provide colour to many f lowers and fruits.  
iii) Chloroplasts: These are green coloured plastids which possess the photosynthetic pigment 
chlorophyll.  
 
Each chloroplast consists of a double membraned envelope and a matrix. The inner membrane 
is arranged along the length of the pl astids as lamellae. At certain regions, the lamellae are 
thickened and appear like pile of coins. These are called the grana. Each granum consists of 
disc shaped membranous sacs called thylakoids. Inside these grana, the chlorophyll is located. 
The non -thylakoid portion of the matrix is called stroma. It contains a number of enzymes 
involved in photosynthesis.  
Functions of Plastids:  Leucoplasts are responsible for storing food; such as carbohydrates, 
protein and lipid. Chromoplasts impart various colours to  the plant parts. A leaf of a plant is 
green in colour because of chloroplast. Chloroplast is the site of photosynthesis.  
CENTROSOME  
 
Centrosome is present in animal cells and in certain lower plants. It is absent in prokaryotic 
cells and in higher plant cells. It is located near one pole of the nucleus. It contains a pair of 
small, hollow granules called centrioles.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 12 - 
  
Functions of Centrioles  
Centrioles play an important role in the formation of spindle fibres during cell division.  
 
 
SUMMARY  
STRUCTURE OF C ELL  
 
 
HISTORY OF DISCOVERY OF CELLS  
Robert Hooke was the first to discover cell (1665).  
Leeuwenhoek was the first to discover free living cells in pond water (1674).  
Robert Brown discovered the nucleus (1831).  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 15 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 63  
 
Q1. Can you name the two organelles we have studied that contain their own genetic 
material?  
Answer: Mitochondria and plastids are the two organelles that contain their own genetic 
material. Both these organelles hav e their own DNA and ribosomes.  
 
Q2. If the organisation of a cell is destroyed due to some physical or chemical influence, 
what will happen?  
Answer: Cell is the smallest unit of life, which is capable of all living functions. If the 
organisation of a cell is destroyed due to some physical or chemical influence, then the ability 
of the cell to perform all living functions such as respiration, nutrition, excretion, etc. would be  
affected.  
 
Q3. Why are lysosomes known as suicide bags?  
Answer: Lysosomes are mem brane -bound vesicular structures that contain powerful digestive 
enzymes. These enzymes are capable of breaking down any foreign food particle or microbes 
entering the cell. Sometimes, lysosomes can cause self -destruction of a cell by releasing these 
diges tive enzymes within the cells. Hence, they are also known as ‘suicidal bags’.  
 
Q4. Where are proteins synthesized inside the cell?  
Answer: Ribosomes are the site for protein synthesis. Ribosomes are very small structures 
found either in a free state, suspe nded in the cytoplasm, or attached to the surface of the 
endoplasmic reticulum. They are composed of ribonucleic acids and proteins.  
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 66 and 67  
 
Q1. Make a comparison and write down ways in which plant cells are different from 
animal cells.  
Answer:  
Differences between Plant cell and Animal cell  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 16 - 
 
 
Q2. How is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell?  
Answer:  
Differences between Prokaryotic cell and Eukaryotic cell  
 
 
Q3. What would happen if the plasma membrane rup tures or breaks down?  
Answer: If the plasma membrane of a cell is ruptured, then the cell will die. The plasma 
membrane regulates the movement of substances in and out of the cell by diffusion or osmosis. 
Thus, if the plasma membrane is ruptured, then the cell might leak out its contents.  
 
Q4. What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi apparatus?  
Answer:  If there was no Golgi apparatus in the cell, then most activities performed by the 
Golgi apparatus will not take place.  
 
 (i) Membrane s of the Golgi apparatus are often connected to ER membranes. It collects 
simpler molecules and combines them to make more complex molecules. These are then 
packaged in small vesicles and are either stored in the cell or sent out as per the requirement. 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 17 - 
 Thus, if the Golgi apparatus is absent in the cell, then the above process of storage, 
modification, and packaging of products will not be possible.  
 
 (ii) The formation of complex sugars from simple sugars will not be possible as this takes 
place with the help of enzymes present in Golgi bodies.  
 
 (iii) The Golgi apparatus is involved in the formation of lysosomes or peroxisomes. Thus, if 
the Golgi body is absent in a cell, the synthesis of lysosomes or peroxisomes will not be 
possible in the cell.  
 
Q5. Whi ch organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why?  
Answer:  Mitochondria are known as the powerhouse of cells. Mitochondria create energy for 
the cell, and this process of creating energy for the cell is known as cellular respiration. Most 
chemical reactions involved in cellular respiration occur in the mitochondria. The energy 
required for various chemical activities needed for life is released by the mitochondria in the 
form of ATP (Adenosine triphosphate) molecules. For this reason, mitochondria a re known as 
the powerhouse of cells.  
 
Q6. Where do the lipids and proteins constituting the cell membrane get synthesised?  
Answer:  Lipids and proteinsconstituting the cell membrane are synthesized in the 
endoplasmic reticulum.  
SER (Smooth endoplasmic ret iculum) helps in the manufacturing of lipids.  
RER (Rough endoplasmic reticulum) has particles attached to its surface, called ribosomes. 
These ribosomes are the site for protein synthesis.  
 
Q7. How does an Amoeba obtain its food?  
Answer:  Amoeba obtains it s food through the process of endocytosis. The flexibility of the 
cell membrane enables the cell to engulf the solid particles of food and other materials from its 
external environment.  
 
 
Cell engulfing food particle  
Q8. What is osmosis?  
Answer:  The move ment of water molecules from a region of high concentration to a region of 
low concentration through a selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis. It is a special 
case of diffusion, where the medium is water.  
 
For example, if the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration than the cell 
i.e., if the solution is a dilute solution, then the cell will gain water by osmosis.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 18 - 
 
 
Q9. Carry out the following osmosis experiment: Take four peeled potato halves and 
scoos each one out to make po tato cups. One of these potato cups should be made from a 
boiled potato. Put each potato cup in a trough containing water. Now,  
(a) Keep cup A empty  
(b) Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B  
(c) Put one teaspoon salt in cup C  
(d) Put one teaspoon sugar in the bo iled potato cup D.  
Keep these for two hours. Then observe the four potato cups and answer the following:  
(i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of B and C.  
(ii) Why is potato A necessary for this experiment?  
(iii) Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed out portions of A and D.  
Answer:     Experimental set up  
 
(i) Water gathers in the hollowed portions of set -up B and C because water enters the potato as 
a result of osmosis. Since the medium surrounding the cell has a higher water concentration 
than the cell, the water moves inside by osmosis. Hence, water gathers in the hollowed portions 
of the potato cup.  
(ii) Potato A in the experiment acts as a control set -up. No water gathers in the hollowed 
portions of potato A.  
(iii) Water d oes not gather in the hollowed portions of potato A because potato cup A is empty. 
It is a control set -up in the experiment.  
 
 Water is not able to enter potato D because the potato used here is boiled. Boiling denatures 
the proteins present in the cell me mbrane and thus, disrupts the cell membrane. For osmosis, a 
semi-permeable membrane is required, which is disrupted in this case. Therefore, osmosis will 
not occur. Hence, water does not enter the boiled potato cup.  
 
 
 
