While examining a thin slice of cork, Robert
Hooke saw that the cork r esembled the
structur e of a honeycomb consisting of many
little compartments. Cork is  a substance
which comes fr om the bark of a tree. This
was in the year 1665 when Hooke made this
chance observation thr ough a self-designed
microscope. Robert Hooke called these boxes
cells. Cell is a Latin wor d for ‘a little r oom’.
This may seem to be a very small and
insignificant incident but it is very important
in the history of science. This was the very first
time that someone had observed that living
things appear to consist of separate units. The
use of the word ‘cell’ to describe these units is
being used till this day in biology.
Let us find out about cells.
5.1What are Living Organisms
Made Up of?
Activity ______________ 5.1
•Let us take a small piece fr om an onion
bulb. W ith the help of a pair of for ceps,
we can peel of f the skin (called
epider mis) fr om the concave side (inner
layer) of the onion. This layer can be
put immediately in a watch-glass
containing water . This will pr event the
peel fr om getting folded or getting dry.
What do we do with this peel?
•Let us take a glass slide, put a dr op of
water on it and transfer a small piece
of the peel fr om the watch glass to the
slide. Make sur e that the peel is
perfectly flat on the slide. A thin camel
hair paintbrush might be necessary to
help transfer the peel. Now we put a
drop of safranin solution on this piece
followed by a cover slip. Take care toavoid air bubbles while putting the
cover slip with the help of a mounting
needle. Ask your teacher for help. W e
have prepared a temporary mount of
onion peel. W e can observe this slide
under low power followed by high
powers of a compound microscope.
Fig. 5.1:  Compound microscope
What do we observe as we look through
the lens? Can we draw the structur es that
we ar e able to see thr ough the micr oscope,
on an observation sheet? Does it look like
Fig. 5.2?
Eyepiece
Coarse adjustment
Fine adjustment
Arm
Objective lens
Stage
Swivel
Mirror
BaseBody tube
Clip
 Micr oscope slide
Condenser
Fig. 5.2:  Cells of an onion peel5
T TTTTHE
HEHE HEHE F  F F  F FUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTALUNDAMENTAL  U  U U  U UNIT NITNIT NITNIT     OF OFOF OFOF L  L L  L LIFE IFEIFE IFEIFEChapter
Nucleus
Cells
2024-25

SCIENCE 50Chlamydomonas , Paramoecium  and bacteria.
These organisms ar e called unicellular
organisms (uni = single). On the other hand,
many cells gr oup together in a single body
and assume dif ferent functions in it to for m
various body parts in multicellular or ganisms
(multi = many) such as some fungi, plants
and animals. Can we find out names of some
more unicellular or ganisms?
Every multi-cellular or ganism has come
from a single cell. How? Cells divide to
produce cells of their own kind. All cells thus
come fr om pr e-existing cells.
Activity ______________ 5.2
•We can try pr eparing temporary
mounts of leaf peels, tip of r oots of
onion or even peels of onions of dif ferent
sizes.
•After per forming the above activity, let
us see what the answers to the following
questions would be:
(a)Do all cells look alike in ter ms of
shape and size?
(b)Do all cells look alike in structur e?
(c)Could we find dif ferences among
cells from different parts of a
plant body?
(d)What similarities could we find?
Some or ganisms can also have cells of
differ
ent kinds. Look at the following pictur e.
It depicts some cells fr om the human body.
SpermBone
cellSmooth
muscle
cellBlood
cells
Ovum
Fig. 5.3: V arious cells fr om the human bodyMore to  knowWe can try pr eparing temporary mounts
of peels of onions of dif ferent sizes. What do
we observe? Do we see similar structur es or
different structur es?
What are these structures?
These structur es look similar to each other .
Together they for m a big structure like an
onion bulb! W e find fr om this activity that
onion bulbs of dif ferent sizes have similar
small structures visible under a micr oscope.
The cells of the onion peel will all look the
same, r egardless of the size of the onion they
came from.
These small structures that we see ar e
the basic building units of the onion bulb.
These structur es ar e called cells. Not only
onions, but all or ganisms that we observe
around ar e made up of cells. However , ther e
are also single cells that live on their own.
Cells wer e first discover ed by
Robert Hooke  in 1665. He observed
the cells in a cork slice with the help
of a primitive micr oscope.
Leeuwenhoek (1674), with the
improved micr oscope, discover ed the
free living cells in pond water for the
first time.  It was Robert Br own in
1831 who discovered the nucleus in
the cell.   Purkinje in 1839 coined the
term ‘pr otoplasm’ for the fluid
substance of the cell. The cell theory,
that all the plants and animals are
composed of cells and that the cell is
the basic unit of life, was pr esented
by two biologists, Schleiden (1838)
and  Schwan n (1839). The cell theory
was further expanded by V irchow
(1855) by suggesting  that all cells
arise  fr om pr e-existing cells.  W ith the
discovery of the electr on micr oscope
in 1940, it was possible to observe and
understand the complex structur e of
the cell and its various or ganelles.
The invention of magnifying lenses led to
the discovery of the micr oscopic world. It is
now known that a single cell may constitute
a whole or ganism as in Amoeba,
Nerve Cell
Fat cell
2024-25

THE FUNDAMENT AL UNIT OF LIFE 51The shape and size of cells are related to
the specific function they per form. Some cells
like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some
cases the cell shape could be mor e or less
fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell;
for example, nerve cells have a typical shape.
Each living cell has the capacity to
perform certain basic functions that ar e
characteristic of all living for ms. How does
a living cell per form these basic functions?
We know that ther e is a division of labour in
multicellular or ganisms such as human
beings. This means that dif ferent parts of
the human body per form dif ferent functions.
The human body has a heart to pump blood,
a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly,
division of labour is also seen within a single
cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain
specific components within it known as cell
organelles. Each kind of cell or ganelle
performs a special function, such as making
new material in the cell, clearing up the
waste material fr om the cell and so on. A
cell is able to live and per form all its
functions because of these or ganelles. These
organelles together constitute the basic unit
called the cell. It is inter esting that all cells
are found to have the same or ganelles, no
matter what their function is or what
organism they ar e found in.
uestions
1.Who discovered cells, and how?
2.Why is the cell called the
structural and functional unit of
life?
5.2What is a Cell Made Up of?
What is the Structural
Organisation of a Cell?
We saw above that the cell has special
components called or ganelles. How is a cell
organised?
If we study a cell under a microscope, we
would come across thr ee featur es in almostevery cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and
cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and
interactions of the cell with its envir onment
are possible due to these featur es. Let us see
how.
5.2.1 PLASMA  MEMBRANE  OR CELL
MEMBRANE
This is the outer most covering of the cell that
separates the contents of the cell fr om its
external envir onment. The plasma membrane
allows or per mits the entry and exit of some
materials in and out of the cell. It also
prevents movement of some other materials.
The cell membrane, ther efore, is called a
selectively per meable membrane.
How does the movement of substances
take place into the cell? How do substances
move out of the cell?
Some substances like carbon dioxide or
oxygen can move acr oss the cell membrane
by a pr ocess called dif fusion. W e have studied
the pr ocess of dif fusion in earlier chapters.
We saw that there is spontaneous movement
of a substance fr om a r egion of high
concentration to a r egion wher e its
concentration is low.
Something similar to this happens in cells
when, for example, some substance like CO2
(which is cellular waste and r equir es to be
excreted out by the cell) accumulates in high
concentrations inside the cell. In the cell’s
exter nal envir onment, the concentration of
CO2 is low as compar ed to that inside the
cell. As soon as ther e is a dif ference of
concentration of CO2 inside and outside a cell,
CO2 moves out of the cell, fr om a r egion of
high concentration, to a r egion of low
concentration outside the cell by the pr ocess
of dif fusion. Similarly, O2 enters the cell by
the pr ocess of dif fusion when the level or
concentration of O2 inside the cell decreases.
Thus, dif fusion plays an important r ole in
gaseous exchange between the cells as well
as the cell and its exter nal envir onment.
Water also obeys the law of dif fusion. The
movement of water molecules through such a
selectively permeable membrane is called osmosis.Q
2024-25

SCIENCE 52The movement of water across the plasma
membrane is also affected by the
amount of substance dissolved in water. Thus,
osmosis is the net diffusion of water across a
selectively permeable membrane toward a
higher solute concentration .
What will happen if we put an animal cell
or a plant cell into a solution of sugar or salt
in water?
One of the following thr ee things could
happen:
1.If the medium surrounding the cell has
a higher water concentration than the
cell, meaning that the outside solution
is very dilute, the cell will gain water by
osmosis. Such a solution is known as
a hypotonic solution.
Water molecules are free to pass
across the cell membrane in both
directions, but more water will come
into the cell than will leave. The net
(overall) result is that water enters the
cell. The cell is likely to swell up.
2.If the medium has exactly the same
water concentration as the cell, there
will be no net movement of water across
the cell membrane. Such a solution is
known as an isotonic solution.
Water crosses the cell membrane in
both directions, but the amount going
in is the same as the amount going out,
so there is no overall movement of
water. The cell will stay the same size.
3.If the medium has a lower
concentration of water than the cell,
meaning that it is a very concentrated
solution, the cell will lose water by
osmosis. Such a solution is known as
a hypertonic solution.
Again, water cr osses the cell
membrane in both dir ections, but this
time mor e water leaves the cell than
enters it. Ther efore the cell will shrink.
Thus, osmosis is a special case of dif fusion
through a selectively permeable membrane.
Now let us try out the following activity:Activity ______________ 5.3
Osmosis with an egg
(a)Remove the shell of an egg by dissolving
it in dilute hydr ochloric acid. The shell
is mostly calcium carbonate. A thin
outer skin now encloses the egg. Put
the egg in pur e water and observe after
5 minutes. What do we observe?
The egg swells because water passes
into it by osmosis.
(b)Place a similar de-shelled egg in a
concentrated salt solution and observe
for 5 minutes. The egg shrinks. Why?
Water passes out of the egg solution
into the salt solution because the salt
solution is mor e concentrated.
We can also try a similar activity with dried
raisins or apricots.
Activity ______________ 5.4
•Put dried raisins or apricots in plain
water and leave them for some time.
Then place them into a concentrated
solution of sugar or salt. Y ou will
observe the following:
(a)Each gains water and swells
when placed in water .
(b)However , when placed in the
concentrated solution it loses
water , and consequently shrinks.
Unicellular freshwater organisms and
most plant cells tend to gain water thr ough
osmosis. Absorption of water by plant r oots
is also an example of osmosis.
Thus, dif fusion is important in exhange
of gases and water in the life of a cell. In
additions to this, the cell also obtains
nutrition fr om its envir onment. Dif ferent
molecules move in and out of the cell
through a type of transport r equiring use
of ener gy.
The plasma membrane is flexible and is
made up of organic molecules called lipids
and pr oteins. However , we can observe the
structur e of the plasma membrane only
through an electr on micr oscope.
The flexibility of the cell membrane also
enables the cell to engulf in food and other
material from its external environment. Such
processes are known as endocytosis. Amoeba
acquires its food through such processes.
2024-25

THE FUNDAMENT AL UNIT OF LIFE 53Activity ______________ 5.5
•Find out about electron microscopes
from resour ces in the school library or
through the inter net. Discuss it with
your teacher .
uestions
1.How do substances like CO2 and
water move in and out of the cell?
Discuss.
2.Why is the plasma membrane
called a selectively per meable
membrane?
5.2.2 CELL WALL
Plant cells, in addition to the plasma
membrane, have another rigid outer covering
called the cell wall. The cell wall lies outside
the plasma membrane. The plant cell wall is
mainly composed of cellulose. Cellulose is a
complex substance and provides structural
strength to plants.
When a living plant cell loses water
through osmosis ther e is shrinkage or
contraction of the contents of the cell away
from the cell wall. This phenomenon is known
as plasmolysis. W e can observe this
phenomenon by per forming the following
activity:
Activity ______________ 5.6
•Mount the peel of a Rhoeo leaf in water
on a slide and examine cells under
the high power of a microscope. Note
the small green granules, called
chlor oplasts. They contain a gr een
substance called chlor ophyll. Put a
strong solution of sugar or salt on the
mounted leaf on the slide. W ait for a
minute and observe under a
microscope. What do we see?
•Now place some Rhoeo leaves in boiling
water for a few minutes. This kills the
cells. Then mount one leaf on a slide
and observe it under a microscope. Put
a strong solution of sugar or salt on
the mounted leaf on the slide. Wait for
a minute and observe it again. What
do we find? Did plasmolysis occur now?What do we infer from this activity? It
appears that only living cells, and not dead
cells, are able to absorb water by osmosis.
Cell walls per mit the cells of plants, fungi
and bacteria to withstand very dilute
(hypotonic) exter nal media without bursting.
In such media the cells tend to take up water
by osmosis. The cell swells, building up
pressur e against the cell wall. The wall exerts
an equal pr essur e against the swollen cell.
Because of their walls, such cells can
withstand much gr eater changes in the
surrounding medium than animal cells.
5.2.3 NUCLEUS
Remember the temporary mount of onion peel
we pr epared? W e had put iodine solution on
the peel. Why? What would we see if we tried
observing the peel without putting the iodine
solution? T ry it and see what the dif ference
is. Further , when we put iodine solution on
the peel, did each cell get evenly colour ed?
According to their chemical composition
different r egions of cells get colour ed
differentially. Some r egions appear darker
than other r egions. Apart fr om iodine solution
we could also use safranin solution or
methylene blue solution to stain the cells.
We have observed cells fr om an onion; let
us now observe cells fr om our own body.
Activity ______________ 5.7
•Let us take a glass slide with a dr op of
water on it. Using an ice-cr eam spoon
gently scrape the inside sur face of the
cheek. Does any material get stuck on
the spoon? W ith the help of a needle
we can transfer this material and
spread it evenly on the glass slide kept
ready for this. T o colour the material
we can put a dr op of methylene blue
solution on it. Now the material is r eady
for observation under micr oscope. Do
not forget to put a cover-slip on it!
•What do we observe? What is the
shape of the cells we see? Draw it on
the observation sheet.Q
2024-25

SCIENCE 54•Was ther e a darkly colour ed, spherical
or oval, dot-like structure near the
centre of each cell? This structure is
called nucleus. W ere ther e similar
structur es in onion peel cells?
The nucleus has a double layer ed covering
called nuclear membrane. The nuclear
membrane has por es which allow the transfer
of material fr om inside the nucleus to its
outside, that is, to the cytoplasm (which we
will talk about in section 5.2.4).
The nucleus contains chr omosomes,
which ar e visible as r od-shaped structures
only when the cell is about to divide.
Chromosomes contain infor mation for
inheritance of characters from parents to next
generation in the for m of DNA (Deoxyribo
Nucleic Acid) molecules. Chr omosomes ar e
composed of DNA and pr otein. DNA molecules
contain the infor mation necessary for
constructing and or ganising cells. Functional
segments of DNA ar e called genes. In a cell
which is not dividing, this DNA is pr esent as
part of chr omatin material. Chr
omatin
material is visible as entangled mass of thr ead
like structur es. Whenever the cell is about to
divide, the chr omatin material gets or ganised
into chr omosomes.
The nucleus plays a central r ole in cellular
reproduction, the pr ocess by which a single
cell divides and for ms two new cells. It also
plays a crucial part, along with the
envir onment, in deter mining the way the cell
will develop and what for m it will exhibit at
maturity, by dir ecting the chemical activities
of the cell.
In some or ganisms like bacteria, the
nuclear r egion of the cell may be poorly
defined due to the absence of a nuclear
membrane. Such an undefined nuclear r egion
containing only nucleic acids is called a
nucleoid. Such or ganisms, whose cells lack
a nuclear membrane, ar e called prokaryotes
(Pro = primitive or primary; karyote ≈ karyon
= nucleus). Or ganisms with cells having a
nuclear membrane are called eukaryotes.
Prokaryotic cells (see Fig. 5.4) also lack
most of the other cytoplasmic organellespresent in eukaryotic cells. Many of the
functions of such organelles are also
performed by poorly or ganised parts of the
cytoplasm (see section 5.2.4). The chlor ophyll
in photosynthetic pr okaryotic bacteria is
associated with membranous vesicles (bag
like structur es) but not with plastids as in
eukaryotic cells (see section 5.2.5).
RibosomesPlasma
membrane
Cell wall
Nucleoid
Fig. 5.4:  Prokaryotic cell
5.2.4 CYTOPLASM
When we look at the temporary mounts of
onion peel as well as human cheek cells, we
can see a lar ge region of each cell enclosed
by the cell membrane. This r egion takes up
very little stain. It is called the cytoplasm.
The cytoplasm is the fluid content inside the
plasma membrane. It also contains many
specialised cell or ganelles. Each of these
organelles per forms a specific function for the
cell.
Cell or ganelles ar e enclosed by
membranes. In pr okaryotes, beside the
absence of a defined nuclear r egion, the
membrane-bound cell or ganelles ar e also
absent. On the other hand, the eukaryotic
cells have nuclear membrane as well as
membrane-enclosed organelles.
The significance of membranes can be
illustrated with the example of viruses.
Viruses lack any membranes and hence do
not show characteristics of life until they enter
a living body and use its cell machinery to
multiply.
2024-25

THE FUNDAMENT AL UNIT OF LIFE 55uestion
1.Fill in the gaps in the following
table illustrating dif ferences
between pr okaryotic and
eukaryotic cells.
Prokaryotic Cell Eukaryotic Cell
1.Size : generally 1.Size: generally
small ( 1-10 µm) large ( 5-100 µm)
1 µm = 10–6 m
2.Nuclear r egion: 2.Nuclear r egion:
_______________ well defined  and
_______________ surrounded by a
and known as__ nuclear membrane
3.Chromosome: 3.More than one
single chromosome
4.Membrane-bound 4._______________
cell or ganelles _______________
absent _______________
5.2.5 CELL ORGANELLES
Every cell has a membrane ar ound it to keep
its own contents separate fr om the exter nal
envir onment. Lar ge and complex cells,
including cells from multicellular or ganisms,
need a lot of chemical activities to support
their complicated structur e and function. T o
keep these activities of dif ferent kinds
separate fr om each other , these cells use
membrane-bound little structures (or
‘organelles’) within themselves. This is one of
the featur es of the eukaryotic cells that
distinguish them fr om pr okaryotic cells. Some
of these or ganelles ar e visible only with an
electr on microscope.
We have talked about the nucleus in a
previous section. Some important examples
of cell or ganelles which we will discuss now
are: endoplasmic r eticulum, Golgi apparatus,
lysosomes, mitochondria and plastids. They
are important because they carry out some
very crucial functions in cells.5.2.5 ( i) ENDOPLASMIC  RETICULUM  (ER)
The endoplasmic r eticulum (ER) is a lar ge
network of membrane-bound tubes and
sheets. It looks like long tubules or r ound or
oblong bags (vesicles). The ER membrane is
similar in structur e to the plasma membrane.
There are two types of ER– r ough endoplasmic
reticulum (RER) and smooth endoplasmic
reticulum (SER). RER looks rough under a
microscope because it has particles called
ribosomes attached to its sur face. The
ribosomes, which ar e present in all active
cells, ar e the sites of protein manufactur e.
The manufactur ed pr oteins ar e then sent to
various places in the cell depending on need,
using the ER. The SER helps in the
manufactur e of fat molecules, or lipids,
important for cell function. Some of these
proteins and lipids help in building the cell
membrane. This pr ocess is known as
membrane biogenesis. Some other pr oteins
and lipids function as enzymes and
hormones. Although the ER varies greatly in
appearance in different cells, it always forms a
network system.Q
Fig. 5.5:  Animal cell
Thus, one function of the ER is to serve as
channels for the transport of materials
(especially proteins) between various r egions
of the cytoplasm or between the cytoplasm
and the nucleus. The ER also functions as a
cytoplasmic framework pr oviding a sur face
2024-25

SCIENCE 56Camillo Golgi was born at
Corteno near Brescia in
1843. He studied
medicine at the University
of Pavia. After graduating
in 1865, he continued to
work in Pavia at the
Hospital of St. Matteo. At
that time most of his
investigations were
concerned with the nervous system, In 1872
he accepted the post of Chief Medical Officer
at the Hospital for the Chronically Sick at
Abbiategrasso.  He first started his
investigations into the nervous system in a
little kitchen of this hospital, which he had
converted into a laboratory. However , the
work of greatest importance, which Golgi
carried out was a revolutionary method of
staining individual nerve and cell structures.
This method is referred to as the ‘black
reaction’. This method uses a weak solution
of silver nitrate and is particularly valuable
in tracing the processes and most delicate
ramifications of cells.  All through his life,
he continued to work on these lines,
modifying and improving this technique.
Golgi received the highest honours and
awards in recognition of his work. He shared
the Nobel prize in 1906 with Santiago
Ramony  Cajal for their work on the structure
of the nervous system.
5.2.5 ( iii) LYSOSOMES
Structurally, lysosomes are membrane-bound
sacs filled with digestive enzymes. These
enzymes ar e made by RER. L ysosomes are a
kind of waste disposal system of the cell. These
help to keep the cell clean by digesting any
foreign material as well as worn-out cell
organelles. Foreign materials entering the cell,
such as bacteria or food, as well as old
organelles end up in the lysosomes, which
break complex substances into simpler
substances. L ysosomes ar e able to do this
because they contain powerful digestive
enzymes capable of breaking down all organic
material. During the disturbance in cellular
metabolism,  for example, when the cell getsFig. 5.6:  Plant cell
for some of the biochemical activities of the
cell. In the liver cells of the group of animals
called vertebrates (see Chapter 7), SER plays
a crucial role in detoxifying many poisons
and drugs.
5.2.5 ( ii) GOLGI APPARATUS
The Golgi apparatus, first described by
Camillo Golgi, consists of a system of
membrane-bound vesicles (flattened sacs)
arranged approximately parallel to each other
in stacks called cisterns. These membranes
often have connections with the membranes
of ER and therefore constitute another portion
of a complex cellular membrane system.
The material synthesised near the ER is
packaged and dispatched to various tar gets
inside and outside the cell thr ough the Golgi
apparatus. Its functions include the storage,
modification and packaging of pr oducts in
vesicles. In some cases, complex sugars may
be made from simple sugars in the Golgi
apparatus. The Golgi apparatus is also
involved in the formation of lysosomes [see
5.2.5 (iii)].
2024-25

THE FUNDAMENT AL UNIT OF LIFE 57damaged, lysosomes may burst and the
enzymes digest their own cell. Therefore,
lysosomes are also known as the ‘suicide bags’
of a cell.
5.2.5 ( iv) MITOCHONDRIA
Mitochondria are known as the powerhouses
of the cell. Mitochondria have two membrane
coverings. The outer membrane is porous
while the inner membrane is deeply folded.
These folds increase surface area for ATP-
generating chemical reactions. The energy
required for various chemical activities needed
for life is released by mitochondria in the form
of ATP (Adenosine triphopshate) molecules.
ATP is known as the energy currency of the
cell. The body uses energy stored in ATP for
making new chemical compounds and for
mechanical work.
Mitochondria are strange organelles in the
sense that they have their own DNA and
ribosomes. Therefore, mitochondria are able
to make some of their own proteins.
5.2.5 ( V) PLASTIDS
Plastids are present only in plant cells. There
are two types of plastids – chromoplasts
(coloured plastids) and leucoplasts (white or
colourless plastids). Chromoplasts containing
the pigment chlorophyll are known as
chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are important for
photosynthesis in plants. Chloroplasts also
contain various yellow or orange pigments in
addition to chlorophyll. Leucoplasts are
primarily organelles in which materials such
as starch, oils and protein granules are stored.
The internal organisation of the Ch loroplast
consists of numerous membrane layers
embedded in a material called the stroma. These
are similar to mitochondria in external
structure. Like the mitochondria, plastids also
have their own DNA and ribosomes.
5.2.5 ( vi) VACUOLES
Vacuoles are storage sacs for solid or liquid
contents. V acuoles are small sized in animal
cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles .
The central vacuole of some plant cells may
occupy 50-90% of the cell volume.In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap
and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell.
Many substances of importance in the life of
the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These
include amino acids, sugars, various organic
acids and some proteins. In single-celled
organisms like Amoeba , the food vacuole
contains the food items that the Amoeba
 has
consumed. In some unicellular organisms,
specialised vacuoles also play important roles
in expelling excess water and some wastes
from the cell.
uestions
1.Can you name the two organelles
we have studied that contain
their own genetic material?
2.If the organisation of a cell is
destr oyed due to some physical
or chemical influence, what will
happen?
3.Why are lysosomes known as
suicide bags?
4.Wher e are proteins synthesised
inside the cell?
Each cell thus acquires its structure and
ability to function because of the organisation
of its membrane and organelles in specific
ways. The cell thus has a basic structural
organisation. This helps the cells to perform
functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition,
and clearing of waste material, or forming
new proteins.
Thus, the cell is the fundamental structural
unit of living organisms. It is also the basic
functional unit of life.
Cell Division
New cells are formed in organisms in order to
grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells,
and to form gametes required for
reproduction. The process by which new cells
are made is called cell division. There are two
main types of cell division: mitosis
and meiosis.
The process of cell division by which most
of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis.
In this process, each cell called mother cellQ
2024-25

SCIENCE 58What
you have
learnt
• The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell.
• Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids
and proteins.
• The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates
the movement of materials between the ordered interior of
the cell and the outer environment.
• In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is
located outside the cell membrane.
• The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants,
fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without
bursting.
• The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm
by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes
of the cell.
• The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular
transport and as a manufacturing surface.
• The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound
vesicles that function in the storage, modification and
packaging of substances manufactured in the cell.
• Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called
plastids, which are of two types—chromoplasts and
leucoplasts.
Fig. 5.7: Mitosis Fig. 5.8:  Meiosis
divides to form two identical daughter cells
(Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same
number of chromosomes as mother cell. It
helps in growth and repair of tissues
in organisms.
Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues
in animals and plants divide to form gametes,
which after fertilisation give rise to offspring.They divide by a different process called
meiosis which involves two consecutive
divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it
produces four new cells instead of just two (Fig.
5.8). The new cells only have half the number
of chromosomes than that of the mother cells.
Can you think as to why the chromosome
number has reduced to half in daughter cells?
2024-25

THE FUNDAMENT AL UNIT OF LIFE 59• Chromoplasts that contain chlorophyll are called chloroplasts
and they perform photosynthesis.
• The primary function of leucoplasts is storage.
• Most mature plant cells have a large central vacuole that
helps to maintain the turgidity of the cell and stores
important substances including wastes.
• Prokaryotic cells have no membrane-bound organelles, their
chromosomes are composed of only nucleic acid, and they
have only very small ribosomes as organelles.
• Cells in organisms divide for growth of body, for repalcing
dead cells, and for forming gametes for reproduction.
Exercises
1.Make a comparison and write down ways in which plant
cells are different from animal cells.
2.How is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell?
3.What would happen if the plasma membrane ruptures or
breaks down?
4.What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi
apparatus?
5.Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why?
6.Where do the lipids and proteins constituting the cell
membrane get synthesised?
7.How does an Amoeba  obtain its food?
8.What is osmosis?
9.Carry out the following osmosis experiment:
Take four peeled potato halves and scoos each one out to
make potato cups. One of these potato cups should be
made from a boiled potato. Put each potato cup in a trough
containing water . Now,•
(a)Keep cup A empty
(b)Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B
(c)Put one teaspoon salt in cup C
(d)Put one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato cup D.
Keep these for two hours. Then observe the four potato
cups and answer the following:
(i)Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of
B and C.
(ii)Why is potato A necessary for this experiment?
(iii)Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed
out portions of A and D.
10. Which type of cell division is required for growth and repair
of body and which type is involved in formation of gametes?
2024-25

