SCIENCE 140We know that all living or ganisms need food.
Food supplies pr oteins, carbohydrates, fats,
vitamins and minerals, all of which we r equir e
for body development, gr owth and health.
Both plants and animals ar e major sources
of food for us. W e obtain most of this food
from agricultur e and animal husbandry.
We read in newspapers that ef forts ar e
always being made to impr ove pr oduction
from agricultur e and animal husbandry. Why
is this necessary? Why we cannot make do
with the curr ent levels of pr oduction?
India is a very populous country. Our
population is mor e than one billion people,
and it is still gr owing. As food for this gr owing
population, we will soon need mor e than a
quarter of a billion tonnes of grain every year .
This can be done by far ming on more land.
But India is alr eady intensively cultivated. As
a result, we do not have any major scope for
increasing the ar ea of land under cultivation.
Therefore, it is necessary to incr ease our
production ef ficiency for both cr ops and
livestock.
Efforts to meet the food demand by
increasing food pr oduction have led to some
successes so far . We have had the gr een
revolution, which contributed to incr eased
food-grain pr oduction. W e have also had the
white revolution, which has led to better and
more efficient use as well as availability of milk.
However , these r evolutions mean that our
natural resources are getting used more
intensively. As a result, there are more
chances of causing damage to our natural
resources to the point of destroying their
balance completely. Therefore, it is important
that we should increase food production
without degrading our environment anddisturbing the balances maintaining it. Hence,
there is a need for sustainable practices in
agriculture and animal husbandry.
Also, simply increasing grain production
for storage in warehouses cannot solve the
problem of malnutrition and hunger . People
should have money to purchase food. Food
security depends on both availability of food
and access to it. The majority of our
population depends on agriculture for their
livelihood. Increasing the incomes of people
working in agriculture is therefore necessary
to combat the pr oblem of hunger . Scientific
management practices should be undertaken
to obtain high yields from farms. For
sustained livelihood, one should undertake
mixed farming, intercropping, and integrated
farming practices, for example, combine
agriculture with livestock/poultry/fisheries/
bee-keeping.
The question thus becomes – how do we
increase the yields of crops and livestock?
12.1Improvement in Crop Yields
Cereals such as wheat, rice, maize, millets and
sorghum provide us carbohydrate for energy
requirement. Pulses like gram ( chana ), pea
(
matar ), black gram ( urad), green gram ( moong ),
pigeon pea ( arhar ), lentil ( masoor ), provide us with
protein. And oil seeds including soyabean,
ground nut, sesame, castor , mustar d, linseed and
sunflower provide us with necessary fats (Fig.
12.1). V egetables, spices and fruits pr ovide a
range of vitamins and minerals in addition to
small amounts of proteins, carbohydrates and
fats. In addition to these food crops, fodder crops
like berseem , oats or sudan grass  are raised as
food for the livestock.12
I II IIMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENTMPROVEMENT      IN ININININ F  F F  F FOOD OODOOD OODOOD R  R R  R RESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESESOURCESChapter
2024-25

IMPROVEMENT  IN FOOD RESOURCES 141the kharif  season from the month of June to
October , and some of the cr ops ar e grown in
the winter season, called the rabi season from
November to April. Paddy, soyabean, pigeon
pea, maize, cotton, gr een gram and black
gram are kharif  crops, whereas wheat, gram,
peas, mustar d, linseed are rabi crops.
In India ther e has been a four times
increase in the production of food grains from
1952 to 2010 with only 25% increase in the
cultivable land ar
ea. How has this incr ease
in pr oduction been achieved? If we think of
the practices involved in far ming, we can see
that we can divide it into thr ee stages. The
first is the choice of seeds for planting. The
second is the nurturing of the cr op plants.
The third is the pr otection of the growing and
harvested cr ops from loss. Thus, the major
groups of activities for impr oving cr op yields
can be classified as:
•Crop variety improvement
•Crop pr oduction impr ovement
•Crop protection management.
12.1.1 CROP VARIETY  IMPROVEMENT
This approach depends on finding a crop
variety that can give a good yield. V arieties or
strains of cr ops can be selected by breeding
for various useful characteristics such as
disease r esistance, r esponse to fertilisers,
product quality and high yields. One way of
incorporating desirable characters into cr op
varieties is by hybridisation. Hybridisation
refers to cr ossing between genetically
dissimilar plants. This cr ossing may be
intervarietal (between dif ferent varieties),
interspecific (between two dif ferent species of
the same genus) or inter generic (between
different genera). Another way of impr oving
the crop is by intr oducing a gene that would
provide the desir ed characteristic. This
results in genetically modified cr ops.
For new varieties of crops to be accepted,
it is necessary that the variety pr oduces high
yields under dif ferent conditions that ar e
found in dif ferent ar eas. Far mers would need
to be provided with good quality seeds of a
particular variety, that is, the seeds should allFig. 12.1:  Different types of crops
uestion
1.What do we get fr om cer eals,
pulses, fruits and vegetables?
Different crops r equir e different climatic
conditions, temperatur e and photoperiods for
their gr owth and completion of their life cycle.
Photoperiods ar e related to the duration of
sunlight. Gr owth of plants and flowering ar e
dependent on sunlight. As we all know, plants
manufactur e their food in sunlight by the
process of photosynthesis. There are some
crops, which are grown in rainy season, called
Q
2024-25

SCIENCE 142be of the same variety and germinate under
the same conditions.
Cultivation practices and crop yield are
related to weather , soil quality and availability
of water . Since weather conditions such as
drought and flood situations ar e
unpr edictable, varieties that can be gr own in
diverse climatic conditions ar e useful.
Similarly, varieties tolerant to high soil  salinity
have been developed. Some of the factors for
which variety impr ovement is done ar e:
•Higher yield: T o increase the
productivity of the cr op per acre.
•Impr oved quality: Quality
considerations of cr op pr oducts vary
from cr op to cr op. Baking quality is
important in wheat, pr otein quality in
pulses, oil quality in oilseeds and
preserving quality in fruits and
vegetables.
•Biotic and abiotic r esistance: Cr ops
production can go down due to biotic
(diseases, insects and nematodes) and
abiotic (dr ought, salinity, water
logging, heat, cold and fr ost) str esses
under dif ferent situations. V arieties
resistant to these str esses can impr ove
crop production.
•Change in maturity duration: The
shorter the duration of the cr op from
sowing to harvesting, the mor e
economical is the variety. Such short
durations allow far mers to gr ow
multiple r ounds of cr ops in a year .
Short duration also r educes the cost
of crop pr
oduction. Unifor m maturity
makes the harvesting pr ocess easy
and r educes losses during harvesting.
•Wider adaptability: Developing
varieties for wider adaptability will
help in stabilising the cr op pr oduction
under dif ferent envir onmental
conditions. One variety can then be
grown under dif ferent climatic
conditions in dif ferent ar eas.
•Desirable agr onomic characteristics:
Tallness and pr ofuse branching ar e
desirable characters for fodder cr ops.
Dwarfness is desired in cereals, so thatless nutrients are consumed by these
crops. Thus developing varieties of
desired agronomic characters help give
higher productivity.
uestions
1.How do biotic and abiotic factors
affect cr op pr oduction?
2.What are the desirable agr onomic
characteristics for crop
improvements?
12.1.2 CROP PRODUCTION  MANAGEMENT
In India, as in many other agriculture-based
countries, farming ranges from small to very
large farms. Different farmers thus have more
or less land, money and access to information
and technologies. In short, it is the money or
financial conditions that allow farmers to take
up different farming practices and agricultural
technologies. There is a correlation between
higher inputs and yields. Thus, the farmer’s
purchasing capacity for inputs decides
cropping system and production practices.
Therefore, production practices can be at
different levels. They include ‘no cost’
production, ‘low cost’ production and ‘high
cost’ production practices.
12.1.2 ( i)  NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT
Just as we need food for development, growth
and well-being, plants also require nutrients
for growth. Nutrients are supplied to plants
by air , water and soil. Ther e are several
nutrients which are essential for plants. Air
supplies carbon and oxygen, hydrogen comes
from water , and soil supplies the other thirteen
nutrients to plants. Amongst these, some are
required in large quantities and are therefore
called macro-nutrients. The other nutrients are
used by plants in small quantities and are
therefore called micro-nutrients (Table 12.1).Q
2024-25

IMPROVEMENT  IN FOOD RESOURCES 143our environment from excessive use of
fertilizers. Using biological waste material is
also a way of recycling farm waste. Based on
the kind of biological material used, manure
can be classified as:
(i)Compost and vermi-compost: The
process in which far m waste material
like livestock excreta (cow dung, etc.),
vegetable waste, animal r efuse,
domestic waste, sewage waste, straw,
eradicated weeds etc. is decomposed
in pits is known as composting. The
compost is rich in or ganic matter and
nutrients. Compost is also prepared
by using earthwor ms to hasten the
process of decomposition of plant and
animal refuse. This is called
vermi-compost.
(ii)Green manure: Prior to the sowing of
the cr op seeds, some plants like sun
hemp or guar ar e grown and then
mulched by ploughing them into the
soil. These gr een plants thus tur n into
green manure which helps in
enriching the soil in nitrogen
and phosphorus.
FERTILIZERS
Fertilizers are commercially produced plant
nutrients. Fertilizers supply nitr ogen,
phosphorus and potassium. They ar e used
to ensur e good vegetative gr owth (leaves,
branches and flowers), giving rise to healthy
plants. Fertilizers are a factor in the higher
yields of high-cost far ming.
Fertilizers should be applied car efully in
terms of pr oper dose, time, and observing pr e-
and post-application pr ecautions for their
complete utilisation. For example, sometimes
fertilizers get washed away due to excessive
irrigation and ar e not fully absorbed by the
plants. This excess fertilizer then leads to
water pollution.
Also, as we have seen in the pr evious
chapter , continuous use of fertilizers in an
area can destroy soil fertility because the
organic matter in the soil is not replenished
and micro-organisms in the soil are harmed
by the fertilizers used. Short-term benefits of
using fertilizers and long-term benefits of usingDeficiency of these nutrients affects
physiological processes in plants including
reproduction, growth and susceptibility to
diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be
enriched by supplying these nutrients in the
form of manure and fertilizers.
uestions
1.What ar e macr o-nutrients and
why ar e they called macr o-
nutrients?
2.How do plants get nutrients?
MANURE
Manure contains lar ge quantities of or ganic
matter and also supplies small quantities of
nutrients to the soil. Manur e is pr epared by
the decomposition of animal excr eta and plant
waste. Manure helps in enriching soil with
nutrients and or ganic matter and increasing
soil fertility. The bulk of or ganic matter in
manur e helps in impr oving the soil structur e.
This involves incr easing the water holding
capacity in sandy soils. In clayey soils, the
large quantities of organic matter help in
drainage and in avoiding water logging.
In using manure we use biological waste
material, which is advantageous in protectingTable 12.1: Nutrients supplied
by air, water and soil
Air carbon, oxygen
Water hydrogen, oxygen
Soil (i)Macronutrients :
nitrogen, phosphorus,
potassium, calcium,
magnesium, sulphur
(ii)Micronutrients:
iron, manganese, boron,
zinc, copper ,
molybdenum, chlorine
QSource Nutrients
2024-25

SCIENCE 144India has a wide variety of water resources
and a highly varied climate. Under such
conditions, several different kinds of irrigation
systems are adopted to supply water to
agricultural lands depending on the kinds of
water resources available. These include wells,
canals, rivers and tanks.
•Wells:  There ar e two types of wells,
namely dug wells and tube wells. In a
dug well, water is collected fr om water
bearing strata. Tube wells can tap
water fr om the deeper strata. Fr om
these wells, water is lifted by pumps
for irrigation.
•Canals:  This is usually an elaborate
and extensive irrigation system. In this
system canals r eceive water from one
or mor e reservoirs or fr om rivers. The
main canal is divided into branch
canals having further distributaries to
irrigate fields.
•River Lift Systems : In ar eas wher e
canal flow is insuf ficient or irr
egular
due to inadequate r eservoir r elease,
the lift system is mor e rational. W ater
is dir ectly drawn fr om the rivers for
supplementing irrigation in ar eas
close to rivers.
•Tanks:  These ar e small storage
reservoirs, which inter cept and stor e
the run-of f of smaller catchment
areas.
Fresh initiatives for incr easing the water
available for agricultur e include rainwater
harvesting and watershed management. This
involves building small check-dams which
lead to an incr ease in gr ound water levels.
The check-dams stop the rainwater fr om
flowing away and also reduce soil erosion.
12.1.2 ( iii)  CROPPING  PATTERNS
Different ways of gr owing cr ops can be used
to give maximum benefit.
Mixed cr opping is gr owing two or mor e
crops simultaneously on the same piece of
land, for example, wheat + gram, or wheat +
mustar d, or gr oundnut + sunflower . This
reduces risk and gives some insurance
against failur e of one of the cr ops.manure for maintaining soil fertility have to
be considered while aiming for optimum yields
in crop production.
uestion
1.Compare the use of manure and
fertilizers in maintaining soil
fertility.
Organic far ming is a far ming system with
minimal or no use of chemicals as fertilizers,
herbicides, pesticides, etc., and with a
maximum input of or ganic manur es, recycled
farm-wastes (straw and livestock excr eta), use
of bio-agents such as cultur e of blue green
algae in pr eparation of biofertilizers, neem
leaves or tur meric specifically in grain storage
as bio-pesticides, with healthy cr opping
systems [mixed cr opping, inter -cropping and
crop rotation as discussed below in 12.1.2.(iii)].
These cropping systems are beneficial in
insect, pest and wheat control besides
providing nutrients.
12.1.2 ( ii)  IRRIGATION
Most agriculture in India is rain-fed, that is,
the success of cr ops in most ar eas is
dependent on timely monsoons and suf ficient
rainfall spread thr ough most of the growing
season. Hence, poor monsoons cause cr op
failur e. Ensuring that the cr ops get water at
the right stages during their gr owing season
can incr ease the expected yields of any cr op.
Therefor e, many measur es are used to bring
more and more agricultural land
under irrigation.Q
More to  knowDroughts occur because of scarcity or
irregular distribution of rains. Drought
poses a threat to rain-fed farming
areas, where farmers do not use
irrigation for crop production and
depend only on rain. Light soils have
less water retention capacity. In areas
with light soils, crops get adversely
affected by drought conditions.
Scientists have developed some crop
varieties which can tolerate drought
conditions.
2024-25

IMPROVEMENT  IN FOOD RESOURCES 145Inter -cropping is gr owing two or mor e
crops simultaneously on the same field in a
definite pattern (Fig.12.2). A few rows of one
crop alter nate with a few r ows of a second
crop, for example, soyabean + maize, or finger
millet (bajra ) + cowpea (lobia ). The crops are
selected such that their nutrient
requir ements ar e dif ferent. This ensur es
maximum utilisation of the nutrients
supplied, and also pr events pests and
diseases fr om spr eading to all the plants
belonging to one cr op in a field. This way,
both crops can give better r eturns.(
gokhroo ), Parthenium ( gajar ghas ), Cyperinus
rotundus ( motha). They compete for food,
space and light. W eeds take up nutrients and
reduce the growth of the crop. Therefore,
removal of weeds from cultivated fields during
the early stages of crop growth is essential for
a good harvest.
Generally insect pests attack the plants
in thr ee ways: (i) they cut the r oot, stem and
leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap fr om various
parts of the plant, and (iii) they bor e into stem
and fruits. They thus af fect the health of the
crop and reduce yields.
Diseases in plants ar e caused by
pathogens such as bacteria, fungi and  viruses.
These pathogens can be pr esent in and
transmitted thr ough the soil, water and air .
Weeds, insects and diseases can be
contr olled by various methods. One of the
most commonly used methods is the use of
pesticides, which include herbicides,
insecticides and fungicides. These chemicals
are sprayed on cr op plants or used for tr eating
seeds and soil. However , excessive use of
these chemicals cr eates problems, since they
can be poisonous to many plant and animal
species and cause envir onmental pollution.
Weed contr ol methods also include
mechanical r emoval. Pr eventive methods
such as pr oper seed bed preparation, timely
sowing of crops, inter cropping and cr op
rotation also help in weed contr ol. Some other
preventive measur es against pests ar e the use
of resistant varieties, and summer ploughing,
in which fields ar e ploughed deep in summers
to destr oy weeds and pests.
uestion
1.Which of the following conditions
will give the most benefits? Why?
(a)Farmers use high-quality
seeds, do not adopt
irrigation or use fertilizers.
(b)Farmers use or dinary
seeds, adopt irrigation and
use fertilizer .
(c)Farmers use quality seeds,
adopt irrigation, use
fertilizer and use crop
protection measur es.Q
Fig. 12.2 : Intercropping
The growing of different crops on a piece
of land in a pre-planned succession is known
as crop r otation. Depending upon the
duration, cr op rotation is done for dif ferent
crop combinations. The availability of moisture
and irrigation facilities decide the choice of the
crop to be cultivated after one harvest. If crop
rotation is done properly then two or three
crops can be grown in a year with
good harvests.
12.1.3 CROP PROTECTION  MANAGEMENT
Field crops are infested by a large number of
weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and
pests ar e not contr olled at the appr opriate
time then they can damage the cr ops so much
that most of the cr op is lost.
Weeds ar e unwanted plants in the
cultivated field, for example, Xanthium
2024-25

SCIENCE 146Activity _____________ 12.1
•Visit a nearby garden/agricultural
field and make a list of the weeds and
the flowers/crops found in the area.
Also, make a list of insect pests, if
any, infesting the flowers/crops.
STORAGE  OF GRAINS
Storage losses in agricultural produce can be
very high. Factors responsible for such losses
are biotic— insects, rodents, fungi, mites and
bacteria, and abiotic— inappropriate moisture
and temperatures in the place of storage. These
factors cause degradation in quality, loss in
weight, poor germinability, discolouration of
produce, all leading to poor marketability.
These factors can be controlled by proper
treatment and by systematic management of
warehouses.
Preventive and control measures are used
before grains are stored for future use. They
include strict cleaning of the produce before
storage, proper drying of the produce first in
sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation
using chemicals that can kill pests.
uestions
1.Why should preventive measures
and biological control methods be
preferred for protecting crops?
2.What factors may be responsible
for losses of grains during
storage?Activity _____________ 12.2
•Collect grains/seeds of cereals,
pulses and oil seeds and gather
information about the seasons in
which they are sown and harvested.
12.2Animal Husbandry
Animal husbandry is the scientific
management of animal livestock. It includes
various aspects such as feeding, br eeding and
disease contr ol. Animal-based far ming
includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish
farming. As the population incr eases and as
living standar ds incr ease, the demand for
milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also,
the gr owing awar eness of the need for
humane tr eatment of livestock has br ought
in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus,
livestock production also needs to be improved.
12.2.1 CATTLE FARMING
Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes—
milk and draught labour for agricultural work
such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian
cattle belong to two dif ferent species, Bos
indicus , cows, and Bos bubalis , buf faloes.
Milk-pr oducing females ar e called milch
animals (dairy animals), while the ones used
for far m labour are called draught animals.
Milk production depends, to some extent,
on the duration of the lactation period,
meaning the period of milk production after QTable 12.2: Nutritional values of animal products
Animal
Products
Fat Protein Sugar Minerals Water Vitamins
Milk (Cow) 3.60 4.00 4.50 0.70 87.20 B1, B2, B12, D, E
Egg 12.00 13.00 * 1.00 74.00 B2, D
Meat 3.60 21.10 * 1.10 74.20 B2, B12
Fish 2.50 19.00 * 1.30 77.20 Niacin, D, A
*Present in very small amountsPer cent (%) Nutrients
2024-25

IMPROVEMENT  IN FOOD RESOURCES 147the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be
increased by increasing the lactation period.
Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey,
Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation
periods, while local breeds (for example, Red
Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to
diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get
animals with both the desired qualities.
uestion
1.Which method is commonly used
for impr oving cattle br eeds and
why?
Activity _____________ 12.3
•Visit a livestock farm. Note the
following:
(1)Number of cattle and number of
different br eeds.
(2)The amount of daily milk pr oduction
from the dif ferent br eeds.
Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for
cows and buf faloes are requir ed for humane
farming, for the health of the animals and
for pr oduction of clean milk as well. Animals
require regular brushing to remove dirt andloose hair . They should be sheltered under
well-ventilated roofed sheds that protect them
from rain, heat and cold. The floor of the cattle
shed needs to be sloping so as to stay dry
and to facilitate cleaning.
The food r equir ements of dairy animals
are of two types: (a) maintenance
requir ement, which is the food r equir ed to
support the animal to live a healthy life, and
(b) milk pr oducing r equir ement, which is the
type of food r equir ed during the lactation
period. Animal feed includes: (a) r oughage,
which is largely fibr e, and (b) concentrates,
which ar e low in fibre and contain r elatively
high levels of pr oteins and other nutrients.
Cattle need balanced rations containing all
nutrients in pr oportionate amounts. Besides
such nutritious food material, certain feed
additives containing micr onutrients pr omote
the health and milk output of dairy animals.
Cattle suf fer from a number of diseases.
The diseases, besides causing death, r educe
milk pr oduction. A healthy animal feeds
regularly and has a nor mal postur e. The
parasites of cattle may be both exter nal
parasites and inter nal parasites. The exter nal
parasites live on the skin and mainly cause
skin diseases. The inter nal parasites like
worms, af fect stomach and intestine while
flukes damage the liver . Infectious diseases
are also caused by bacteria and viruses.
Vaccinations ar e given to far m animals
against many major viral and bacterial
diseases.
12.2.2 POULTRY FARMING
Poultry farming is undertaken to raise
domestic fowl for egg pr oduction and chicken
meat. Ther efore, impr oved poultry br eeds ar e
developed and far med to pr oduce layers for
eggs and br oilers for meat.
The cr oss-br eeding pr ogrammes between
Indian (indigenous, for example, Aseel) and
foreign (exotic, for example, Leghor n) breeds
for variety impr ovement ar e focused on to
develop new varieties for the following
desirable traits—
(i)number and quality of chicks;Q
Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle
2024-25

SCIENCE 148(ii)dwarf broiler parent for commercial
chick production;
(iii)summer adaptation capacity/
tolerance to high temperatur e;
(iv)low maintenance r equir ements;
(v)reduction in the size of the egg-laying
bird with ability to utilise mor e
fibrous cheaper diets for mulated
using agricultural by-pr oducts.The ration (daily food r equir ement) for br oilers
is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of
vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry
feeds.
Poultry fowl suf fer fr om a number of
diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi,
parasites, as well as fr om nutritional
deficiencies. These necessitate pr oper
cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of
disinfectants at r egular intervals. Appr opriate
vaccination can pr event the occurr ence of
infectious diseases and r educe loss of poultry
during an outbr eak of disease.
uestions
1.What management practices are
common in dairy and poultry
farming?
2.What ar e the dif ferences between
broilers and layers and in their
management?
Activity _____________ 12.4
•Visit a local poultry farm. Observe
types of breeds and note the type of
ration, housing and lighting facilities
given to them. Identify the growers,
layers and broilers.
12.2.3 FISH PRODUCTION
Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for
our food. Fish pr oduction includes the finned
true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns
and molluscs. Ther e are two ways of obtaining
fish. One is fr om natural resour ces, which is
called captur e fishing. The other way is by
fish far ming, which is called cultur e fishery.
The water sour ce of the fish can be either
seawater or fr esh water , such as in rivers and
ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by
captur e and cultur e of fish in marine and
freshwater ecosystems.
12.2.3 ( i) MARINE FISHERIES
India’s marine fishery resources include
7500 km of coastline and the deep seasFig. 12.4Aseel Leghor n
uestion
1.Discuss the implications of the
following statement:
“It is inter esting to note that
poultry is India’s most ef ficient
converter of low fibre food stuf f
(which is unfit for human
consumption) into highly
nutritious animal pr otein food.”
EGG AND BROILER  PRODUCTION
Broiler chickens ar e fed with vitamin-rich
supplementary feed for good gr owth rate and
better feed ef ficiency. Care is taken to avoid
mortality and to maintain feathering and
carcass quality. They ar e produced as br oilers
and sent to market for meat purposes.
For good pr oduction of poultry bir ds, good
management practices ar e important. These
include maintenance of temperatur e and
hygienic conditions in housing and poultry
feed, as well as pr evention and contr ol of
diseases and pests.
The housing, nutritional and
envir onmental r equir ements of br oilers ar e
somewhat dif ferent fr om those of egg layers.QQ
2024-25

IMPROVEMENT  IN FOOD RESOURCES 149beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties
include pomphret, macker el, tuna, sar dines,
and Bombay duck. Marine fish are caught
using many kinds of fishing nets fr om fishing
boats. Y ields ar e incr eased by locating lar ge
schools of fish in the open sea using satellites
and echo-sounders.
Some marine fish of high economic value
are also far med in seawater . This includes
finned fishes like mullets, bhetki
, and pearl
spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5),
mussels and oysters as well as seaweed.
Oysters ar e also cultivated for the pearls
they make.
Macr obrachium r osenber gii
(fresh water)Peneaus monodon
(marine)
Fig. 12.5 :  Fresh water and marine prawns
As marine fish stocks get further depleted,
the demand for mor e fish can only be met by
such cultur e fisheries, a practice called
mariculture.
12.2.3 ( ii)  INLAND  FISHERIES
Fresh water resources include canals, ponds,
reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water
resources, wher e seawater and fr esh water
mix together , such as estuaries and lagoons
are also important fish r eservoirs. While
captur e fishing is also done in such inland
water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish
production fr om these r esour
ces is thr ough
aquacultur e.
Fish cultur e is sometimes done in
combination with a rice cr op, so that fish ar e
grown in the water in the paddy field. Mor e
intensive fish far ming can be done in
composite fish cultur e systems. Both local
and imported fish species ar e used in such
systems.In such a system, a combination of five or
six fish species is used in a single fishpond.
These species ar e selected so that they do
not compete for food among them having
different types of food habits. As a r esult, the
food available in all the parts of the pond is
used. As Catlas are sur face feeders, Rohus
feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals
and Common Carps ar e bottom feeders, and
Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these
species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the
pond without competing with each other . This
increases the fish yield fr om the pond.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp  (c) Rohu (d) Grass
Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp(e)
(f)
One problem with such composite fish
cultur e is that many of these fish br eed only
during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected
from the wild, it can be mixed with that of
other species as well. So, a major pr oblem in
fish far ming is the lack of availability of good-
quality seed. T o over come this pr oblem, ways
have now been worked out to br eed these fish
in ponds using hor monal stimulation. This
has ensur ed the supply of pure fish seed in
desired quantities.
2024-25

SCIENCE 150uestions
1.How are fish obtained?
2.What ar e the advantages of
composite fish cultur e?
Activity _____________ 12.5
•Visit a fish farm in fish breeding
season and note the following:
(1)Varieties of fish in fish far m
(2)Types of ponds
(3)Feed ingredients used
(4)Production capacity of the farm
If there are no fish farms close to your
locality, gather the above information from
Internet, by referring books or talking to
people who are engaged in fishery.
12.2.4 BEE-KEEPING
Honey is widely used and ther efore bee-
keeping for making honey has become an
agricultural enterprise. Since bee-keeping
needs low investments, far mers use it as an
additional income generating activity. In
addition to honey, the beehives ar e a source
of wax which is used in various medicinal
preparations.
The local varieties of bees used for
commer cial honey pr oduction ar e Apis cerana
indica , commonly known as the Indian bee,
A. dorsata,  the rock bee and A. florae,  the little
bee. An Italian bee variety, A. mellifera, has
also been brought in to increase yield of honey.This is the variety commonly used for
commercial honey production.
The Italian bees have high honey collection
capacity. They sting somewhat less. They stay
in a given beehive for long periods, and breed
very well. For commercial honey production,
bee farms or apiaries are established.
The value or quality of honey depends
upon the pasturage, or the flowers available
to the bees for nectar and pollen collection.
In addition to adequate quantity of pasturage,
the kind of flowers available will deter mine
the taste of the honey.
uestions
1.What ar e the desirable
characters of bee varieties
suitable for honey production?
2.What is pasturage and how is it
related to honey production?Q
(a) (b)
Fig. 12.7:  (a) Arrangement of beehive in an apiary
(b) honey extractor
Q
What
you have
learnt
• There are several nutrients essential for crops. Of these,
some are required in large quantities and are known as
macro-nutrients whereas rest of the nutrients are required
in small quantities and are known as micro-nutrients.
• Manure and fertilizers are the main sources of nutrient
supply to crops.
• Organic farming is a farming system with minimal or no use
of chemicals as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides etc. and
2024-25

IMPROVEMENT  IN FOOD RESOURCES 151
with a maximum input of organic manures, recyled farm wastes, and
bio-agents, with healthy cropping systems.
• Mixed farming is a system of farming on a particular farm which
includes crop production, raising of livestock etc.
• Mixed cropping is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the
same piece of land.
• Growing two or mor e crops in definite r ow patter ns is known as inter -
cropping.
• The growing of different crops on a piece of land in pre-planned
succession is called crop rotation.
• Varietal impr ovement is requir ed for higher yield, good quality, biotic
and abiotic resistance, shortening the maturity duration, wider
adaptability and desirable agronomic characteristics.
• Farm animals requir e proper car e and management such as shelter ,
feeding, breeding and disease control. This is called animal husbandry.
• Poultry farming is done to raise domestic fowls. Poultry production
includes egg production and broiler production for poultry meat.
• To enhance poultry production, cross breeding is done between Indian
and exotic breeds for variety improvement.
• Fish may be obtained from marine resources as well as inland
resources.
• To increase production of fish, they can be cultured in marine and
inland ecosystems.
• Marine fish capture is done by fishing nets guided by echo-sounders
and satellites.
• Composite fish culture system is commonly used for
fish farming.
• Bee-keeping is done to get honey and wax.
Exercises
1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield.
2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields?
3. What ar e the advantages of inter -cropping and cr op rotation?
4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices?
5. How do storage grain losses occur?
6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers?
7. What are the benefits of cattle farming?
8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and
bee-keeping?
9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mariculture and
aquaculture?
2024-25

