Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 1 - 
 CHAPTER – 6 
 
LIFE PROCESSES  
 
LIFE PROCESS  
The maintenance of living organisms must go on even at the conditions, when they are not 
physically active. Even when we sit idle and d uring sleeping, this maintenance job through 
cells functioning has to go on. The life process includes the activities performed by the 
different organs to maintain the body.  
 
Some of the life processes in the living beings are described below:  
 
Nutrition  
The process of obtaining energy through consumption of food is called as nutrition.  
 
Respiration  
The process of acquiring oxygen through breathing and make it available to cells for 
the process of breaking down of organic substances into simpler compounds is called as 
respiration.  
 
Transportation  
Transportation is the process by which the food and oxygen is carried from one organ 
to other organs in the body.  
 
Excretion  
It is the process by which the metabolic waste by -products are removed from the 
different  organs and released out from the body.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 95  
 
Question 1: Why is diffusion insufficient to meet the oxygen requirements of multi -
cellular organisms like humans?  
Answer : Multicellular organisms such as humans possess complex body d esigns. They have 
specialised cells and tissues for performing various necessary functions of the body such as 
intake of food and oxygen. Unlike unicellular organisms, multicellular cells are not in direct 
contact with the outside environment. Therefore, d iffusion cannot meet their oxygen 
requirements.  
 
Question 2: What criteria do we use to decide whether something is alive?  
Answer : Any visible movement such as walking, breathing, or growing is generally used to 
decide whether something is alive or not. H owever, a living organism can also have 
movements, which are not visible to the naked eye. Therefore, the presence of life processes is 
a fundamental criterion that can be used to decide whether something is alive or not.  
 
Question 3: What are outside raw materials used for by an organism?  
Answer : An organism uses outside raw materials mostly in the form of food and oxygen. The 
raw materials required by an organism can be quite varied depending on the complexity of the 
organism and its environment.  
 
Questi on 4: What processes would you consider essential for maintaining life?  
Answer : Life processes such as nutrition, respiration, transportation, excretion, etc. are 
essential for maintaining life.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 2 - 
 NUTRITION  
 
The process by which an organism takes food and utilizes it is called nutrition.  
 
NEED OF NUTRITION  
Organisms need energy to perform various activities. The energy is supplied by the nutrients. 
Organisms need various raw materials for growth and repair. These raw materials are provided 
by nutrients.  
 
NUTRIENTS  
Materials which provide nutrition to organisms are called nutrients. Carbohydrates, proteins 
and fats are the main nutrients and are called macronutrients. Minerals and vitamins are 
required in small amounts and hence are called micronutrients.  
 
TYPES OF NUTRITION:  
Autotrophic Nutrition:  The mode of nutrition in which an organism prepares its own 
food is called autotrophic nutrition. Green plants and blue -green algae follow the 
autotrophic mode of nutrition.  
Heterotrophic Nutrition:  The mode of nutr ition in which an organism takes food from 
another organism is called heterotrophic nutrition. Organisms; other than green plants 
and blue -green algae follow heterotrophic mode of nutrition.  
 
AUTOTROPHIC NUTRITION  
Autotrophic organisms are able to produce  organic matter from simple inorganic materials. 
They consequently create their own food —but require a source of energy to do this.  
Photoautotrophs harvest energy from light to produce organic matter.  
Chemoautotrophs use energy from inorganic reactions in the environment to drive the 
creation of organic matter.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 3 - 
 HETEROTROPHIC NUTRITION  
Heterotrophic nutritrion is typical of animals. These organisms eat organic matter in other 
organisms —either alive (as hunters) or dead (as scavengers).  
Saprotrophic organisms are the decay organisms. They digest dead materials using enzymes 
that they sec rete externally. Fungi and many bacteria are saprotrophes.  
Parasites (biotrophs) feed on living organisms without killing them.  
 
Heterotrophic nutrition can be further divided into two types, viz. saprophytic nutrition and 
holozoic nutrition.  
o Saprophytic Nutrition:  In saprophytic nutrition; the organism secretes the digestive 
juices on the food. The food is digested while it is still to be ingested. The digested 
food is then ingested by the organism. All the decomposers follow saprophytic 
nutrition. Some i nsects; like houseflies; also follow this mode of nutrition.  
o Holozoic Nutrition: In holozoic nutrition; the digestion happens inside the body of 
the organism, i.e. after the food is ingested. Most of the animals follow this mode of 
nutrition.  
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 4 - 
  
PLANT N UTRITION  
Green plants prepare their own food. They make food in the presence of sunlight. Sunlight 
provides energy, carbon dioxide and water are the raw materials and chloroplast is the site 
where food is made.  
 
 
PHOTOSYNTHESIS:  The process by which green plants prepare food is called 
photosynthesis. During this process; the solar energy is converted into chemical energy and  
carbohydrates are formed. Green leaves are the main sites of photosynthesis. The green portion 
of the plant contains a pigment chloroplast; which contains chlorophyll. The whole process of 
photosynthesis can be shown by following equation:  
 
 
 
STEPS OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS:  
Sunlight activates chlorophyll; which leads to splitting of water molecule.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 5 - 
 The hydrogen; released by splitting of water molecule is utilized for red uction of 
carbon dioxide to produce carbohydrates.  
Oxygen is the byproduct of photosynthesis.  
Carbohydrate is subsequently converted into starch and is stored in leaves and other 
storage parts.  
The splitting of water molecules is part of the light reaction . 
Other steps are part of the dark reaction during photosynthesis.  
 
HOW DO RAW MATERIALS FOR PHOTOSYNTHESIS BECOME AVAILABLE TO 
THE PLANT?  
Water comes from soil; through the xylem tissue in roots and stems.  
Carbon dioxide comes in the leaves through stomat a. 
 
SIGNIFICANCE OF PHOTOSYNTHESIS:  
Photosynthesis is the main way through which the solar energy is made available for 
different living beings.  
Green plants are the main producers of food in the ecosystem. All other organisms 
directly or indirectly depend  on green plants for food.  
The process of photosynthesis also helps in maintaining the balance of carbon dioxide 
and oxygen in the air.  
 
 
ANIMAL NUTRITION  
Heterotrophic Nutrition:  When an organism takes food from another organism, it is called 
heterotrophic nutrition. Different heterotrophic organisms follow different methods to take and 
utilize food. Based on this, heterotrophic nutri tion can be divided into two types:  
Saprophytic Nutrition:  In saprophytic nutrition, the digestion of food takes place 
before ingestion of food. This type of nutrition is usually seen in fungi and some other 
microorganisms. The organism secretes digestive enzymes on the food and then ingests 
the simple substances. Saprophytes feed on dead materials and thus help in 
decomposition dead remains of plants and animals.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 6 - 
 
 
Holozoic Nutrition:  In holozoic nutrition, the digestion of food follows after the 
ingestion of food. Thus, digestion takes place inside the body of the organism. Holozoic 
nutrition happens in five steps, viz. ingestion, d igestion, absorption, assimilation and 
egestion.  
 
STEPS OF HOLOZOIC NUTRITION  
Ingestion: The process of taking in the food is called ingestion.  
Digestion: The process of breaking complex food substances into simple molecules is 
called digestion. Simple molecules; thus obtained; can be absorbed by the body.  
Absorption: The process of abs orption of digested food is called absorption.  
Assimilation: The process of utilization of digested food; for energy and for growth and 
repair is called assimilation.  
Egestion: The process of removing undigested food from the body is called egestion.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 7 - 
  
NUTR ITION IN AMOEBA:  
 
Amoeba is a unicellular animal which follows holozoic mode of nutrition. The cell m embrane 
of amoeba keeps on protruding into pseudopodia. Amoeba surrounds a food particle with 
pseudopodia and makes a food vacuole. The food vacuole contains the food particle and water. 
Digestive enzymes are secreted in the food vacuole and digestion take s place. After that, 
digested food is absorbed from the food vacuole. Finally, the food vacuole moves near the cell 
membrane and undigested food is expelled out.  
 
NUTRITION IN HUMAN BEINGS  
Human beings are complex animals; which have a complex digestive sy stem. The human 
digestive system is composed of an alimentary canal and some accessory glands. The 
alimentary canal is divided into several parts, viz. oesophagus, stomach, small intestine, large 
intestine, rectum and anus. Salivary gland, liver and pancre as are the accessory glands which 
lie outside the alimentary canal.  
 
STRUCTURE OF THE HUMAN DIGESTIVE SYSTEM  
 
Mouth or Buccal Cavity:  The mouth has teeth and tongue. Salivary glands are also present in 
the mouth. The tongue has gustatory receptors which pe rceive the sense of taste. Tongue helps 
in turning over the food, so that saliva can be properly mixed in it.  
Teeth help in breaking down the food into smaller particles so that swallowing of food 
becomes easier. There are four types of teeth in human bein gs. The incisor teeth are used for 
cutting the food. The canine teeth are used for tearing the food and for cracking hard 
substances. The premolars are used for coarse grinding of food. The molars are used for fine 
grinding of food.  
Salivary glands secrete  saliva. Saliva makes the food slippery which makes it easy to swallow 
the food. Saliva also contains the enzyme salivary amylase or ptyalin. Salivary amylase digests 
starch and converts it into sucrose.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 8 - 
 
 
 
Stomach:  Stom ach i s a bag -like organ. Highly muscular walls of the stomach help in churning 
the food. The walls of stomach secrete hydrochloric acid. Hydrochlor ic acid kills the germs 
which may be present in food. Moreover, it makes the medium inside stomach as acidic. The 
acidic medium is necessary for gastric enzymes to work. The enzyme pepsin; secreted in 
stomach; does partial digestion of protein. The mucus; secreted by the walls of the stomach 
saves the inner lining of stomach from getting damaged from hydrochloric acid.  
 
Small Intestine:  It is a highly coiled tube -like structure. The small intestine is longer than the 
large intestine but its lumen is smaller  than that of the large intestine. The small intestine is 
divided into three parts, viz. duodenum, jejunum and ileum.  
 
Liver:  Liver is the largest organ in the human body. Liver manufactures bile; which gets stored 
in gall bladder. From the gall bladder, b ile is released as and when required.  
 
Pancreas:  Pancreas is situated below the stomach. It secretes pancreatic juice which contains 
many digestive enzymes.  
Bile and pancreatic juice go to the duodenum through a hepato -pancreatic duct. Bile breaks 
down fat  into smaller particles. This process is called emulsification of fat. After that, the 
enzyme lipase digests fat into fatty acids and glycerol. Trypsin and chymotrypsin are enzymes 
which digest protein into amino acids. Complex carbohydrates are digested i nto glucose. The 
major part of digestion takes place in the duodenum.  
No digestion takes place in jejunum. The inner wall in the ileum is projected into numerous 
finger -like structures; called villi. Villi increase the surface area inside the ileum so that  
optimum absorption can take place. Moreover, villi also reduce the lumen of the ileum so that 
food can stay for longer duration in it; for optimum absorption. Digested food is absorbed by 
villi. 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 9 - 
 Large Intestine:  Large intestine is smaller than small intes tine. Undigested food goes into the 
large intestine. Some water and salt are absorbed by the walls of the large intestine. After that, 
the undigested food goes to the rectum; from where it is expelled out through the anus.  
 
Flow chart of human digestive sy stem  
 
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 101  
 
Question 1: What are the differences between autotrophic nutrition and heterotrophic 
nutrition?  
Answer :  
Autotrophic nutrition  Heterotrophic nutrition  
1. Food is synthesised from simple 
inorganic raw materials such as CO2 
and water.  1. Food is obtained directly or indirectly 
from autotrophs. This food is broken 
down with the help of enzymes.  
2. Presence of green pigment 
(chlorophyll) is necessary.  2. No pigment is required in this type of 
nutrition.  
3. Food is generally prepared during 
day time.  3. Food can be prepared at all times.  
4. All green plants and some bacteria 
have this type of nutrition.  4. All animals and fungi have this type 
of nutrition.  
 
Question 2: Where do plants get each of the raw materials required for photosynthesis?  
Answer : The following raw materials are required for photosynthesis:  
The raw material CO2 enters from the atmosphere through stomata.  
Water is absorbed from the soil by the plant roots.  
Sunlight, an important component to manufacture food, is absorbed by  the chlorophyll 
and other green parts of the plants.  
 
Question 3: What is the role of the acid in our stomach?  
Answer : Following are the roles of acid in our stomach:  
1. The hydrochloric acid present in our stomach dissolves bits of food and creates an acid ic 
medium. In this acidic medium, enzyme pepsinogen is converted to pepsin, which is a 
protein -digesting enzyme.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 10 - 
 2. The hydrochloric acid kills the harmful microbes that enter with food and thus prevents 
infection of digestive tract.  
 
Question 4: What is the function of digestive enzymes?  
Answer : Digestive enzymes such as amylase, lipase, pepsin, trypsin, etc. help in the breaking 
down of complex food particles into simple ones. These simple particles can be easily absorbed 
by the blood and thus transported t o all the cells of the body.  
 
Question 5: How is the small intestine designed to absorb digested food?  
Answer : The small intestine has millions of tiny finger -like projections called villi. These villi 
increase the surface area for more efficient food abs orption. Within these villi, many blood 
vessels are present that absorb the digested food and carry it to the blood stream. From the 
blood stream, the absorbed food is delivered to each and every cell of the body.  
 
 
 
RESPIRATION  
The process by which a liv ing being utilizes the food to get energy is called respiration. 
Respiration is an oxidation reaction in which carbohydrate is oxidized to produce energy. 
Mitochondrion is the site of respiration and the energy released is stored in the form of ATP 
(Adenos ine triphosphate). ATP is stored in mitochondria and is released as per need.  
 
STEPS OF RESPIRATION:  
Breaking down glucose into pyruvate: This step happens in the cytoplasm. Glucose 
molecule is broken down into pyruvic acid. Glucose molecule is composed of  6 carbon 
atoms, while pyruvic acid is composed of 3 carbon atoms.  
Fate of Pyruvic Acid:  Further breaking down of pyruvic acid takes place in 
mitochondria and the molecules formed depend on the type of respiration in a particular 
organism. Respiration is o f two types, viz. aerobic respiration and anaerobic respiration.  
 
TYPES OF RESPIRATION:  
Aerobic Respiration: This type of respiration happens in the presence of oxygen. 
Pyruvic acid is converted into carbon dioxide. Energy is released and water molecule is  
also formed at the end of this process.  
Anaerobic Respiration:  This type of respiration happens in the absence of oxygen. 
Pyruvic acid is either converted into ethyl alcohol or lactic acid. Ethyl alcohol is usually 
formed in case of anaerobic respiration in microbes; like yeast or bacteria. Lactic acid is 
formed in some microbes as well as in the muscle cells.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 11 - 
 
 
 
 
Pain in Leg Muscles on Running:  When someone runs too fast, he may experience a 
throbbing pain in the leg muscles. This happens because of ana erobic respiration taking place 
in the muscles. During running, the energy demand from the muscle cells increases. This is 
compensated by anaerobic respiration and lactic acid is formed in the process. The deposition 
of lactic acid causes the pain the leg muscles. The pain subsides after taking rest for some time.  
 
Exchange of Gases:  For aerobic respiration; organisms need a continuous supply of oxygen, 
and carbon dioxide produced during the process needs to be removed from the body. Different 
organisms use  different methods for intake of oxygen and expulsion of carbon dioxide. 
Diffusion is the method which is utilized by unicellular and some simple organisms for this 
purpose. In plants also, diffusion is utilized for exchange of gases. In complex animals, 
respiratory system does the job of exchange of gases. Gills are the respiratory organs for fishes. 
Fishes take in oxygen; which is dissolved in water; through gills. Since availability of oxygen 
is less in the aquatic environment so the breathing rate of aq uatic organisms is faster. Insects 
have a system of spiracles and tracheae which is used for taking in oxygen.  
 
Terrestrial organisms have developed lungs for exchange of gases. Availability of oxygen is 
not a problem in the terrestrial environment so brea thing rate is slower compared to what it is 
in fishes.  
 
HUMAN RESPIRATORY SYSTEM:  
The human respiratory system is composed of a pair of lungs. These are attached to a system of 
tubes which open on the outside through the nostrils. Following are the main st ructures in the 
human respiratory system:  
 
Nostrils:  There two nostrils which converge to form a nasal passage. The inner lining of the 
nostrils is lined by hairs and remains wet due to mucus secretion. The mucus and the hairs help 
in filtering the dust pa rticles out from inhaled air. Further, air is warmed up when it enters the 
nasal passage.  
 
Pharynx:  It is a tube like structure which continues after the nasal passage.  
 
Larynx:  This part comes after the pharynx. This is also called the voice box.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 12 - 
  
Trachea : This is composed of rings of cartilage. Cartilaginous rings prevent the collapse of 
trachea in the absence of air.  
 
Bronchi:  A pair of bronchi comes out from the trachea; with one bronchus going to each lung.  
 
Bronchioles:  A bronchus divides into branche s and sub -branches; inside the lung.  
 
Alveoli:  T h e s e  a r e  a i r -sacs at the end of bronchioles. Alveolus is composed of a very thin 
membrane and is the place where blood capillaries open. This is alveolus; where oxygen mixes 
with the blood and carbon dioxide exits from the blood. The exchange of gases; in alveoli; 
takes place due to pressure differential.  
 
Breathing Mechanism: The breathing mechanism of lungs is controlled by the diaphragm and 
the intercostalis muscles. Diaphragm is a membrane which separates  t h e  t h o r a c i c  c h a m b e r  
from the abdominal cavity. When diaphragm moves down, the lungs expand and air is inhaled. 
When diaphragm moves up, the lungs contract and air is exhaled.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 105  
 
Question 1: What advantage over an aquatic orga nism does a terrestrial organism have 
with regard to obtaining oxygen for respiration?  
Answer : Terrestrial organisms take up oxygen from the atmosphere whereas aquatic animals 
need to utilize oxygen present in the water. Air contains more O2 as compared t o water. Since 
the content of O2 in air is high, the terrestrial animals do not have to breathe faster to get more 
oxygen. Therefore, unlike aquatic animals, terrestrial animals do not have to show various 
adaptations for better gaseous exchange.  
 
Question  2: What are the different ways in which glucose is oxidized to provide energy in 
various organisms?  
Answer :  Glucose is first broken down in the cell cytoplasm into a three carbon molecule 
called pyruvate. Pyruvate is further broken down by different ways  to provide energy.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 13 - 
  
The breakdown of glucose by different pathways can be illustrated as follows.  
 
 
 
In yeast and human muscle cells, the breakdown of pyruvate occurs in the absence of oxygen 
whereas in mitochondria, the breakdown of pyruvate occurs in t he presence of oxygen.  
 
Question 3:  How is oxygen and carbon dioxide transported in human beings?  
Answer : Haemoglobin transports oxygen molecule to all the body cells for cellular 
respiration. The haemoglobin pigment present in the blood gets attached to  four O2 molecules 
that are obtained from breathing. It thus forms oxyhaemoglobin and the blood becomes 
oxygenated. This oxygenated blood is then distributed to all the body cells by the heart. After 
giving away O2 to the body cells, blood takes away CO2 w hich is the end product of cellular 
respiration. Now the blood becomes de -oxygenated.  
 
Since haemoglobin pigment has less affinity for CO2, CO2 is mainly transported in the 
dissolved form. This de -oxygenated blood gives CO2 to lung alveoli and takes O2 in return.  
 
 
 
Question 4: How are the lungs designed in human beings to maximize the area for 
exchange of gases?  
Answer : The exchange of gases takes place between the blood of the capillaries that surround 
the alveoli and the gases present in the alveoli. T hus, alveoli are the site for exchange of gases. 
The lungs get filled up with air during the process of inhalation as ribs are lifted up and 
diaphragm is flattened. The air that is rushed inside the lungs fills the numerous alveoli present 
in the lungs.  
 
Each lung contains 300 -350 million alveoli. These numerous alveoli increase the surface area 
for gaseous exchange making the process of respiration more efficient.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 14 - 
 TRANSPORTATION IN ANIMALS  
 
Circulatory System:  The circulatory system is responsible for tra nsport of various substances 
in human beings. It is composed of the heart, arteries, veins and blood capillaries. Blood plays 
the role of the carrier of substances.  
 
HEART   
Heart is a muscular organ; which is composed of cardiac muscles. It is so small tha t it can fit 
inside and adult’s fist. The heart is a pumping organ which pumps the blood. The human heart 
is composed of four chambers, viz. right auricle, right ventricle, left auricle and left ventricle.  
 
Systole:  Contraction of cardiac muscles is called  systole.  
 
Diastole:  Relaxation of cardiac muscles is called diastole.  
 
Arteries:  These are thick -walled blood vessels which carry oxygenated blood from the heart to 
different organs. Pulmonary arteries are exceptions because they carry deoxygenated blood 
from the heart to lungs; where oxygenation of blood takes place.  
 
Veins:  T h e s e  a r e  t h i n -walled blood vessels which carry deoxygenated blood from different 
organs to the heart. Pulmonary veins are exceptions because they carry oxygenated blood from 
lungs to  the heart. Valves are present in veins to prevent backflow of blood.  
 
Capillaries:  These are the blood vessels which have single -celled walls.  
 
Blood:  Blood is a connective tissue which plays the role of the carrier for various substances in 
the body. Blo od is composed of plasma, blood cells and platelets.  
 
Blood Plasma:  Blood plasma is a pale coloured liquid which is mostly composed of water. 
Blood plasma forms the matrix of blood.  
 
Blood Cells:  There are two types of blood cells, viz. Red Blood Cells (RB Cs) and White 
Blood Cells (WBCs).  
 
Red Blood Corpuscles (RBCs):  These are of red colour because of the presence of 
haemoglobin which is a pigment. Haemoglobin readily combines with oxygen and carbon 
dioxide. The transport of oxygen happens through haemoglo bin. Some part of carbon dioxide 
is also transported through haemoglobin.  
 
White Blood Corpuscles (WBCs):  These are of pale white colour. They play important role in 
the immunity.  
 
Platelets:  Platelets are responsible for blood coagulation. Blood coagulati on is a defense 
mechanism which prevents excess loss of blood; in case of an injury.  
 
Lymph:  Lymph is similar to blood but RBCs are absent in lymph. Lymph is formed from the 
fluid which leaks from blood capillaries and goes to the intercellular spaces in t he tissues. This 
fluid is collected through lymph vessels and finally returns to the blood capillaries. Lymph also 
plays an important role in the immune system.  
 
Double Circulation:  In the human heart, blood passes through the heart twice in one cardiac 
cycle. This type of circulation is called double circulation. One complete heart beat in which all 
the chambers of the heart contract and relax once is called cardiac cycle. The heart beats about 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 15 - 
 72 times per minute in a normal adult. In one cardiac cycle, t he heart pumps out 70 mL blood 
and thus about 4900 mL blood in a minute. Double circulation ensures complete segregation of 
oxygenated and deoxygenated blood which is necessary for optimum energy production in 
warm -blooded animals.  
 
Circulation of Blood t hrough the heart:  
Systemic Vein → Sinus Venosus → Right Auricle → Right Ventricle → Pulmonary Artery → 
Lungs → Pulmonary Vein → Left Auricle → Left Ventri cl e → Trunchus Arteriosus → Sy stem i c 
Circulation  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 16 - 
 TRANSPORTATION IN PLANTS  
Plants have specialized v ascular tissues for transportation of substances. There are two types of 
vascular tissues in plants, viz. xylem and phloem.  
 
Xylem:  Xylem is responsible for transportation of water and minerals. It is composed of 
trachieds, xylem vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem fibre. Trachieds and xylem vessels are 
the conducting elements. The xylem makes a continuous tube in plants which runs from roots 
to stem and right up to the veins of leaves.  
 
Phloem:  Phloem is responsible for transportation of food. Phloem is co mposed of sieve tubes, 
companion cells, phloem parenchyma and bast fibres. Sieve tubes are the conducting elements 
in phloem.  
 
Ascent of Sap  
The upward movement of water and minerals from roots to different plant parts is called ascent 
of sap. Many factors  are at play in ascent of sap and it takes place in many steps. They are 
explained as follows:  
 
Root Pressure:  The wal l s of cells of root hairs are very thin. Water; from soil; enters the root 
hairs because of osmosis. Root pressure is responsible for movement of water up to the base of 
the stem.  
 
Capillary Action:  A very fine tube is called capillary. Water; or any liquid; ris es in the 
capillary because of physical forces and this phenomenon is called capillary action. Water; in 
stem; rises up to some height because of capillary action.  
 
Adhesion -cohesion of Water Molecules:  Water molecules make a continuous column in the 
xylem  because of forces of adhesion and cohesion among the molecules.  
 
Transpiration Pull:  Loss of water vapour through stomata and lenticels; in plants; is called 
transpiration. Transpiration through stomata creates vacuum which creates a suction; called 
trans piration pull. The transpiration pull sucks the water column from the xylem tubes and thus 
water is able to rise to great heights in even the tallest plants.  
 
Transport of Food:  Transport of food in plants happens because of utilization of energy. 
Thus, un like the transport through xylem; it is a form of active transport. Moreover, the flow of 
substances through phloem takes place in both directions, i.e. it is a two -way traffic in phloem.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 17 - 
 
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 110  
 
Question 1: What are the componen ts of the transport system in human beings? What 
are the functions of these components?  
Answer : The main components of the transport system in human beings are the heart, blood, 
and blood vessels.  
 
Heart pumps oxygenated blood throughout the body. It rece ives deoxygenated blood from the 
various body parts and sends this impure blood to the lungs for oxygenation.  
 
Being a fluid connective tissue, blood helps in the transport of oxygen, nutrients, CO2, and 
nitrogenous wastes.  
 
The blood vessels (arteries, ve ins, and capillaries) carry blood either away from the heart to 
various organs or from various organs back to the heart.  
 
Question 2: Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in 
mammals and birds?  
Answer : Warm -blooded animals such  as birds and mammals maintain a constant body 
temperature by cooling themselves when they are in a hotter environment and by warming 
their bodies when they are in a cooler environment. Hence, these animals require more oxygen 
(O2) for more cellular respir ation so that they can produce more energy to maintain their body 
temperature.  
 
Thus, it is necessary for them to separate oxygenated and de -oxygenated blood, so that their 
circulatory system is more efficient and can maintain their constant body temperatu re. 
 
Question 3: What are the components of the transport system in highly organised plants?  
Answer : In highly organised plants, there are two different types of conducting tissues − 
xylem and phloem. Xylem conducts water and minerals obtained from the so il (via roots) to 
the rest of the plant. Phloem transports food materials from the leaves to different parts of the 
plant body.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 18 - 
 Question 4: How are water and minerals transported in plants?  
Answer : The components of xylem tissue (tracheids and vessels) o f roots, stems, and leaves 
are interconnected to form a continuous system of water -conducting channels that reaches all 
parts of the plant. Transpiration creates a suction pressure, as a result of which water is forced 
into the xylem cells of the roots. Th en there is a steady movement of water from the root xylem 
to all the plant parts through the interconnected water -conducting channels.  
 
Question 5:  How is food transported in plants?  
Answer : Phloem transports food materials from the leaves to different  parts of the plant body. 
The transportation of food in phloem is achieved by utilizing energy from ATP. As a result of 
this, the osmotic pressure in the tissue increases causing water to move into it. This pressure 
moves the material in the phloem to the tissues which have less pressure. This is helpful in 
moving materials according to the needs of the plant. For example, the food material, such as 
sucrose, is transported into the phloem tissue using ATP energy.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 19 - 
 EXCRETION  
Removal of harmful waste from the body is called excretion. Many wastes are produced during 
various metabolic activities. These need to be removed in time because their accumulation in 
the body can be harmful and even lethal for an organism.  
 
HUMAN EXCRETORY SYSTEM  
The human excretory system is composed of a pair of kidneys. A tube; called ureter; comes out 
of each kidney and goes to the urinary bladder. Urine is collected in the urinary bladder, from 
where it is expelled out through urethra as and when required.  
 
Kidney:  Kidney is a b ean-shaped organ which lies near the vertebral column in the abdominal 
cavity. The kidney is composed of many 
filtering units; called nephrons. Nephron 
is called the functional unit of kidney.  
 
Nephron:  It is composed of a tangled 
mess of tubes and a filte ring part; called 
glomerulus. Glomerulus is a network of 
blood capillaries to which renal artery is 
attached. The artery which takes blood 
to the glomerulus is called afferent 
arteriole and the one receiving blood 
from the glomerulus is called efferent 
arteriole. Glomerulus is enclosed in a 
capsule like portion; called Bowman’s 
capsule. The Bowman’s capsule extends 
into a fine tube which is highly coiled. 
Tubes from various nephrons converge 
into collecting duct; which finally goes 
to the ureter.  
 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 20 - 
 Filtrati on in Glomerulus:  Filtration happens because of very high pressure inside the 
glomerulus. The lumen of efferent arteriole is smaller than that of afferent arteriole. Due to 
this, the blood entering the glomerulus experiences very high pressure and due to t his, the 
waste products are filtered out through the thin membrane of capillaries in the glomerulus. The 
filtered blood is sent to the systemic circulation through efferent arteriole and the filtrate goes 
to the Bowman’s capsule. That is how urine is forme d inside the kidneys. Reabsorption of 
water and some other filtrates takes place in the tubular part of the nephron. This increases the 
concentration of urine. The human urine is mainly composed of water and urea.  
 
EXCRETION IN PLANTS  
 
Plants have no speci al organs for removal of wastes. The waste products of respiration and 
photosynthesis are used as raw materials for each other. Oxygen gas produced as a by -product 
of photosynthesis is used up during respiration and carbon dioxide produced during respirati on 
is used up during photosynthesis.  
 
Excretion is carried out in the plants in the following ways:  
The gaseous wastes, oxygen, carbon dioxide and water vapour are removed through 
stomata of leaves and lenticels of stems.  
Some waste products collect in the  leaves and bark of trees. When the leaves and bark 
are shed, the wastes are eliminated.  
Some waste products are rendered harmless and then stored in the plant body as solid 
bodies. Raphides, tannins, resins, gum, rubber and essential oils are some such wa stes. 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 112  
 
Question 1: Describe the structure and functioning of nephrons.  
Answer : Nephrons are the basic filtering units of kidneys. Each kidney possesses large 
number of nephrons, approximately 1 -1.5 million. The main componen ts of the nephron are 
glomerulus, Bowman’s capsule, and a long renal tubule.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 21 - 
 Functioning of a nephron:  
The blood enters the kidney through the renal artery, which branches into many capillaries 
associated with glomerulus.  
 
The water and solute are transf erred to the nephron at Bowman’s capsule.  
 
In the proximal tubule, some substances such as amino acids, glucose, and salts are selectively 
reabsorbed and unwanted molecules are added in the urine.  
 
The filtrate then moves down into the loop of Henle, where  more water is absorbed.  
 
From here, the filtrate moves upwards into the distal tubule and finally to the collecting duct. 
Collecting duct collects urine from many nephrons.  
 
The urine formed in each kidney enters a long tube called ureter. From ureter, it  gets 
transported to the urinary bladder and then into the urethra.  
 
Question 2: What are the methods used by plants to get rid of excretory products?  
Answer : Plants can get rid of excess of water by transpiration. Waste materials may be stored 
in the cel l vacuoles or as gum and resin, especially in old xylem. It is also stored in the leaves 
that later fall off.  
 
Question 3:  How is the amount of urine produced regulated?  
Answer : The amount of urine produced depends on the amount of excess water and disso lved 
wastes present in the body. Some other factors such as habitat of an organism and hormone 
such as Anti -diuretic hormone (ADH) also regulates the amount of urine produced.  
 
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 113  
 
Question 1: The kidneys in human beings are a part of the system for  
(a) nutrition.  
(b) respiration.  
(c) excretion.  
(d) transportation.  
Answer : (c) In human beings, the kidneys are a part of the system for excretion.  
 
Question 2: The xylem in plants are responsible for  
(a) transport of water.  
(b) transport of food.  
(c) transport of amino acids.  
(d) transport of oxygen.  
Answer : (a) In a plant, the xylem is responsible for transport of water.  
 
Question 3: The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires  
(a) carbon dioxide and water.  
(b) chlorophyll.  
(c) sunlight.  
(d) all of the above.  
Answer : (d) The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires carbon dioxide, water, chlorophyll 
and sunlight.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 22 - 
 Question 4:  The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes 
place in  
(a) cytoplasm.  
(b) mi tochondria.  
(c) chloroplast.  
(d) nucleus.  
Answer : (b) The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes place 
in mitochondria.  
 
Question 5:  How are fats digested in our bodies? Where does this process take place?  
Answer : Fats are present in the form of large globules in the small intestine. The small 
intestine gets the secretions in the form of bile juice and pancreatic juice respectively from the 
liver and the pancreas. The bile salts (from the liver) break down the large fat glob ules into 
smaller globules so that the pancreatic enzymes can easily act on them. This is referred to as 
emulsification of fats. It takes place in the small intestine.  
 
Question 6:  What is the role of saliva in the digestion of food?  
Answer : Saliva is se creted by the salivary glands, located under the tongue. It moistens the 
food for easy swallowing. It contains a digestive enzyme called salivary amylase, which breaks 
down starch into sugar.  
 
Question 7: What are the necessary conditions for autotrophic n utrition and what are its 
by-products?  
Answer : Autotrophic nutrition takes place through the process of photosynthesis. Carbon 
dioxide, water, chlorophyll pigment, and sunlight are the necessary conditions required for 
autotrophic nutrition. Carbohydrates  (food) and O2 are the by -products of photosynthesis.  
 
 
 
Question 8: What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration? Name 
some organisms that use the anaerobic mode of respiration.  
Answer :  
Aerobic respiration  Anaerobic respiration  
1. It occurs in the presence of O2.   
 1. It occurs in the absence of O2.  
2. It involves the exchange of gases 
between the organism and the 
outside environment.  2. Exchange of gases is absent.  
 
3. It occurs in cytoplasm and 
mitochondria.  3. It occurs only in cytoplasm.  
 
4. It always releases CO2 and H2O.   
 4. End products vary.  
 
5. It yields 36 ATPs.  5. It yields only 2 ATPs.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 23 - 
 Anaerobic respiration occurs in the roots of some waterlogged plants, some parasitic worms, 
animal muscles, and some micro -organisms such as yeasts.  
 
Question 9 : How are the alveoli designed to maximise the exchange of gases?  
Answer : The alveoli are the small balloon -like structures present in the lungs. The walls of the 
alveoli consist of extensive network of blood vessels. Each lung contains 300 −350 million 
alveoli, making it a total of approximately 700 million in both the lungs. Th e alveolar surface 
when spread out covers about 80 m2 area. This large surface area makes the gaseous exchange 
more efficient.  
 
 
 
Question 10:  What would be the consequences of a deficiency of haemoglobin in our 
bodies?  
Answer : Haemoglobin is the respir atory pigment that transports oxygen to the body cells for 
cellular respiration. Therefore, deficiency of haemoglobin in blood can affect the oxygen 
supplying capacity of blood. This can lead to deficiency of oxygen in the body cells. It can also 
lead to a  disease called anaemia.  
 
Question 11:  Describe double circulation in human beings. Why is it necessary?  
Answer : The human heart is divided into four chambers − the right atrium, the right ventricle, 
the left atrium, and the left ventricle.  
 
Flow of blo od in the heart:  
The heart has superior and inferior vena 
cava, which carries de -oxygenated blood 
from the upper and lower regions of the 
body respectively and supplies this de -
oxygenated blood to the right atrium of the 
heart.  
 
The right atrium then contr acts and passes 
the de -oxygenated blood to the right 
ventricle, through an auriculo -ventricular 
aperture.  
 
Then the right ventricle contracts and passes 
the de -oxygenated blood into the two 
pulmonary arteries, which pumps it to the 
lungs where the blood be comes oxygenated. 
From the lungs, the pulmonary veins transport the oxygenated blood to the left atrium of the 
heart.  

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 24 - 
  
Then the left atrium contracts and through the auriculo -ventricular aperture, the oxygenated 
blood enters the left ventricle.  
 
The blood passes to aorta from the left ventricle. The aorta gives rise to many arteries that 
distribute the oxygenated blood to all the regions of the body.  
 
 
Therefore, the blood goes twice through the heart. This is known as double circulation.  
 
Importance of do uble circulation:  
The separation of oxygenated and de -oxygenated blood allows a more efficient supply of 
oxygen to the body cells. This efficient system of oxygen supply is very useful in warm -
blooded animals such as human beings.  
 
As we know, warm -blooded  animals have to maintain a constant body temperature by cooling 
themselves when they are in a hotter environment and by warming their bodies when they are 
in a cooler environment. Hence, they require more O2 for more respiration so that they can 
produce m ore energy to maintain their body temperature. Thus, the circulatory system of 
humans is more efficient because of the double circulatory heart.  
 
Question 12:  What are the differences between the transport of materials in xylem and 
phloem?  
Answer :  
Transp ort of materials in xylem  Transport of materials in phloem  
1. Xylem tissue helps in the transport of 
water and minerals.   1. Phloem tissue helps in the transport 
of food.  
2. Water is transported upwards from 
roots to all other plant parts.  2. Food is transported in both upward 
and downward directions.  
3. Transport in xylem occurs with the 
help of simple physical forces such as 
transpiration pull.   3. Transport of food in phloem 
requires energy in the form of ATP.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 25 - 
 Question 13: Compare the functioning of alveoli in the l ungs and nephrons in the kidneys 
with respect to their structure and functioning.  
Answer : ALVEOLI  
Structure  
(i) Alveoli are tiny balloon -like structures present inside the lungs.  
(ii) The walls of the alveoli are one cell thick and it contains an extensi ve network of blood 
capillaries.  
 
Function  
(i) The exchange of O2 and CO2 takes place between the blood of the capillaries that surround 
the alveoli and the gases present in the alveoli.  
 
(ii) Alveoli are the site of gaseous exchange.  
 
NEPHRON  
Structure  
(i) Nephrons are tubular structures present inside the kidneys.  
(ii) Nephrons are made of glomerulus, bowman’s capsule, and a long renal tube. It also 
contains a cluster of thin -walled capillaries.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 26 - 
 Function  
(i) The blood enters the kidneys through the renal artery which branches into many capillaries 
in the glomerulus. The water and solute are transferred to the nephron at Bowman’s capsule. 
Then the filtrate moves through the proximal tubule and then down into the loop of henle. 
From henle’s loop, filtr ate passes into the distal tubule and then to the collecting duct. The 
collecting duct collects the urine from many nephrons and passes it to the ureter. During the 
flow of filtrate, some substances such as glucose, amino acids, and water are selectively r e-
absorbed.  
 
(ii) Nephrons are the basic filtration unit.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 48 - 
 CHAPTER – 7 
 
CONTROL AND COORDINATION  
 
INTRODUCTION  
As the complexity of the individuals, plants or animals increases the different cells and organs 
become separated fr om each other by greater distance. Thus it becomes necessary to have a 
system by which the different parts of the organisms can function as a single unit. This is 
possible only if the different parts can coordinate with each other and carry out a particula r 
function.  
To carry out a simple function such as picking up an object from the ground there has to be 
coordination of the eyes, hands, legs and the vertebral column. The eyes have to focus on the 
object, the hands have to pick it up and grasp it, the leg s have to bend and so does the back 
bone (vertebral column). All these actions have to be coordinated in such a manner that they 
follow a particular sequence and the action is completed. A similar mechanism is also needed 
for internal functions of the body . 
The individuals also have to adjust to the changing conditions around them and vary their 
responses. At the same time, the internal conditions of the body should be maintained constant. 
This is called homeostasis. Homeostasis is derived from 'homeo' mean ing same and 'stasis' 
meaning standing still. The internal conditions of the body are maintained at a constant by 
controlling the physiology of the organism. Just as in animals, plants also have to control and 
coordinate their various functions.  
NERVOUS SY STEM  
The nervous system of an animal is composed of  
i) Specialized cells called neurons or nerve cells which can detect, receive and transmit 
different kinds of stimuli.  
ii) The nerve fibres which are certain bundles of extended processes of nerve cells.  
 
NERVE CELLS  
Nerve cells or neurons are the structural and functional units of the nervous system. Billions of 
nerve cells make up our brain.  
A nerve cell is a microscopic structure consisting of three major parts namely cell body, 
dendrites and axon.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 49 - 
  
CELL BODY  
It is the cell structure irregular in shape or polyhedral structure, it is also called as cyton. Cel l 
body contains cytoplasm with typical cell organelles and certain granular bodies are called 
Nissl granules .  
 
DENDRITES  
Dendrites or Dendrons are shorter fibres which branch repeatedly and project out of the cell 
body. Dendrites transmit electrical impulses towards the cyton.  
 
AXON  
One of the fibres arising from the cell body is very long with a branched distal end and it is 
called as Axon.  
 
The dis tal branches terminate as bulb like structures called synaptic knob filled with chemicals 
called neuro transmitters. Axon contains axoplasm inside and is covered by a membrane called 
neurilemma. Neurilemma encloses the axon except at the branched distal en ds. In some 
neurons called myelinated neurons an additional white fatty fibre called myelin sheath covers 
the neurilemma. Myelin sheath is not continous over the neurilemma. The gaps left by the 
myelin sheath on the axon are called Nodes of Ranvier. Over t he myelin sheath are found 
certain cells called Schwann cells.  
 
TYPES OF NERVE CELLS  
a) Myelinated or Medullated or White neurons:  
When the axon is enclosed by the white fatty myelin cover it is called Myelinated or 
Medullated or White neurons. This forms the cerebral cortex of our brain.  
b) Non - Myelinated or Non -Medullated or Grey neurons:  
This neuron is not enclosed by myelin sheath; so it appears greyish in colour.  
The axon is covered by only neurilemma and Schwann cells. This type of neuron is found i n 
the white matter of cerebrum.  
c) Unipolar neurons:  
The embryonic nervous tissue contains unipolar neurons. An unipolar  
neuron has a nerve cell body with a single process or fibre, which will act both as axon and 
Dendron.  
 
d) Bipolar neurons:  
The sensor y hair cells of the sense organs like rods and cones of retina are made up of bipolar 
neurons. Each bipolar neuron has a cell body and two process at the ends, one acting as axon 
and the other acting as Dendron.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 50 - 
 e) Multipolar neuron:  
The cerebral cortex co ntains the multipolar neurons; each multipolar neuron has a cell body 
with many dendrites and an axon.  
Synapse: The dendrites and the synaptic knobs of the axons of neighbouring neurons are in 
physical contact with one another without fusing. This point of  c o n t a c t  b e t w e e n  t h e  
neighbouring nerve cells is called synapse.  
 
NERVE IMPULSE  
The conduction of stimuli by the nerve cells is called nerve impulse. The dendrites will receive 
the stimuli from the receptor (sense organ) and conduct the same as electrical impulse to the 
axon through the cyton. At the synapse, the synaptic knobs release out chemical substances 
called neuro transmitters which convert the electrical impulse into chemical impulse and pass it 
to the neighbouring neuron.  
 
TYPES OF NEURON  
 
Sensory  neuron: These neurons receive signals from a sense organ.  
Motor neuron: These neurons send signals to a muscle or a gland.  
Association neuron: These neurons relay the signals between sensory neuron and motor 
neuron.  
 
Pathways: From stimulus to response  
In the holding stick activity you observed that there is coordination between eye and finger. 
Different pathways are taken by nerves to bring about this coordinated activity.  
On the basis of pathways followed, nerves are classified mainly into three differen t types.  
 
AFFERENT NEURONS:  
Afferent (or ferrying towards) which carry messages towards the central nervous system 
(spinal cord or brain) from nerve endings on the muscles of different sense organs that sense 
the change in surroundings are called stimulus detectors. These are also called ‘sensory’ 
nerves.  
 
 
EFFERENT NEURON:  
Efferent (or ferrying away) which carry messages from the central nervous system to parts that 
shall carry out the response or the effectors (nerve endings). They are also called ‘motor ’ 
nerves.  
 
ASSOCIATION NERVES:  
Association nerves, which link together the afferent and efferent nerves.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 51 - 
 
 
 
 
NERVOUS SYSTEM IN HUMANS  
The nervous system can be divided into two major regions: the central and peripheral nervous 
systems. The central nervo us system (CNS) is the brain and spinal cord, and the peripheral 
nervous system (PNS) is everything else. The brain is contained within the cranial cavity of the 
skull, and the spinal cord is contained within the vertebral cavity of the vertebral column. I t is a 
bit of an oversimplification to say that the CNS is what is inside these two cavities and the 
peripheral nervous system is outside of them, but that is one way to start to think about it. In 
actuality, there are some elements of the peripheral nervo us system that are within the cranial 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 52 - 
 or vertebral cavities. The peripheral nervous system is so named because it is on the 
periphery —meaning beyond the brain and spinal cord. Depending on different aspects of the 
nervous system, the dividing line between central and peripheral is not necessarily universal.  
The nervous system can be divided into two parts mostly on the basis of a functional difference 
in responses. The somatic nervous system (SNS) is responsible for conscious perception and 
voluntary motor responses. Voluntary motor response means the contraction of skeletal 
muscle, but those contractions are not always voluntary in the sense that you have to want to 
perform them. Some somatic motor responses are reflexes, and often happen without a 
consciou s decision to perform them. If your friend jumps out from behind a corner and yells 
“Boo!” you will be startled and you might scream or leap back. You didn’t decide to do that, 
and you may not have wanted to give your friend a reason to laugh at your expen se, but it is a 
reflex involving skeletal muscle contractions. Other motor responses become automatic (in 
other words, unconscious) as a person learns motor skills (referred to as “habit learning” or 
“procedural memory”).  
The autonomic nervous system (ANS)  is responsible for involuntary control of the body, 
usually for the sake of homeostasis (regulation of the internal environment). Sensory input for 
autonomic functions can be from sensory structures tuned to external or internal environmental 
stimuli. The  motor output extends to smooth and cardiac muscle as well as glandular tissue. 
The role of the autonomic system is to regulate the organ systems of the body, which usually 
means to control homeostasis. Sweat glands, for example, are controlled by the auto nomic 
system. When you are hot, sweating helps cool your body down. That is a homeostatic 
mechanism. But when you are nervous, you might start sweating also. That is not homeostatic, 
it is the physiological response to an emotional state.  
 
 
 
There is anot her division of the nervous system that describes functional responses. The enteric 
nervous system (ENS) is responsible for controlling the smooth muscle and glandular tissue in 
your digestive system. It is a large part of the PNS, and is not dependent on the CNS. It is 
sometimes valid, however, to consider the enteric system to be a part of the autonomic system 
because the neural structures that make up the enteric system are a component of the 
autonomic output that regulates digestion. There are some diff erences between the two, but for 
our purposes here there will be a good bit of overlap. See Figure for examples of where these 
divisions of the nervous system can be found.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 53 - 
 REFLEX ACTION  
Reflex action is a special case of involuntary movement in voluntary organs. When a voluntary 
organ is in the vicinity of a sudden danger, it is immediately pulled away from the danger to 
save itself. For example; when your hand touches a very hot electric iron, you move away your 
hand in a jerk. All of this happens in flas h and your hand is saved from the imminent injury. 
This is an example of reflex action.  
 
 
Reflex Arc:  The path through which nerves signals; involved in a reflex action; travel is called 
the reflex arc. The following flow chart shows the flow of signal i n a reflex arc.  
 
The receptor is the organ which comes in the danger zone. The sensory neurons pick signals 
from the receptor and send them to the relay neuron. The relay neuron is present in the spinal 
cord. The spinal cord sends signals to the effector via the motor neuron. The effector comes in 
action moves the receptor away from the danger.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 54 - 
 
 
The reflex arc passes at the level of the spinal cord and the signals involved in reflex action do 
not travel up to the brain. This is important because sending s ignals to the brain would involve 
more time. Although every action is ultimately controlled by the brain, the reflex action is 
mainly controlled at the level of spinal cord.  
Muscular Movements and Nervous Control:  Muscle tissues have special filaments; cal led 
actin and myosin. When a muscle receives a nerve signal; a series of events is triggered in the 
muscle. Calcium ions enter the muscle cells. It results in actin and myosin filaments sliding 
towards each other and that is how a muscle contracts. Contrac tion in a muscle brings 
movement in the related organ.  
HUMAN BRAIN  
 
Human brain is a highly complex organ; which is mainly composed of the nervous tissue. The 
tissues are highly folded to accommodate a larger surface area in less space. The brain is 
cover ed by a three layered system of membranes; called meninges. Cerebrospinal fluid is filled 
between the meninges. The CSF provides cushion to the brain against mechanical shocks. 
Furthermore, the brain is housed inside the skull for optimum protection. The h uman brain can 
be divided into three regions, viz. forebrain, midbrain and hindbrain.  
 
PARTS OF HUMAN BRAIN  
Forebrain: It is composed of the cerebrum.  
Midbrain: It is composed of the hypothalamus.  
Hindbrain: It is composed of the cerebellum, pons and medul la oblongata.  
Some main structures of the human brain are explained below.  
Cerebrum:  The cerebrum is the largest part in the human brain. It is divided into two 
hemispheres; called cerebral hemispheres.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 55 - 
 FUNCTIONS OF CEREBRUM:  
The cerebrum controls the volu ntary motor actions.  
It is the site of sensory perceptions; like tactile and auditory perceptions.  
It is the seat of learning and memory.  
 
Hypothalamus:  The hypothalamus lies at the base of the cerebrum. It controls sleep and wake 
cycle (circadian rhythm ) of the body. It also controls the urges for eating and drinking.  
Cerebellum:  Cerebellum lies below the cerebrum and at the back of the whole structure. It 
coordinates the motor functions. When you are riding your bicycle; the perfect coordination 
between  your pedaling and steering control is achieved by the cerebellum.  
Medulla:  Medulla forms the brain stem; along with the pons. It lies at the base of the brain and 
continues into the spinal cord. Medulla controls various involuntary functions; like hear b eat, 
respiration, etc.  
 
  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 56 - 
 
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 119  
 
Question 1: What is the difference between a reflex action and walking?  
Answer :  
A reflex action is a rapid, automatic response to a stimulus. It does not involve any thinking. 
For example, we c lose our eyes immediately when the bright light is focused. Walking, on the 
other hand, is a voluntary action. It is under our conscious control.  
 
Question 2: What happens at the synapse between two neurons?  
Answer :  
A very small gap that occurs between t he last portion of axon of one neuron and the dendron of 
the other neuron is known as a synapse. It acts as a one way valve to transmit impulses in one 
direction only. This uni -direction transfer of impulses occurs as the chemicals are produced in 
only one  side of the neuron i.e., the axon’s side. From axon, the impulses travel across the 
synapse to the dendron of the other neuron.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 57 - 
 
 
 
Question 3:  Which part of the brain maintains posture and equilibrium of the body?  
Answer : Cerebellum, a part of hindbrai n is responsible for maintaining posture and 
equilibrium of the body.  
 
Question 4: How do we detect the smell of an agarbatti (incense stick)?  
Answer : The thinking part of our brain is the forebrain. It has separate areas that are 
specialized for hearing,  smelling, sight, taste, touch, etc. The forebrain also has regions that 
collect information or impulses from the various receptors. When the smell of an incense stick 
reaches us, our forebrain detects it. Then, the forebrain interprets it by putting it to gether with 
the information received from other receptors and also with the information already stored in 
the brain.  
 
Question 5: What is the role of the brain in reflex action?  
Answer : Reflex actions are sudden responses, which do not involve any thinkin g. For 
example, when we touch a hot object, we withdraw our hand immediately without thinking as 
thinking may take time which would be enough to get us burnt.  
 
The sensory nerves that detect the heat are connected to the nerves that move the muscles of 
the hand. Such a connection of dete cting the signal from the nerves (input) and responding to it 
quickly (output) is called a reflex arc. The reflex arcs −connections present between the input 
and output nerves − meet in a bundle in the spinal cord.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 58 - 
 REFLEX ARC: Reflex arcs are formed in t he spinal cord and the information (input) reaches 
the brain. The brain is only aware of the signal and the response that has taken place. However, 
the brain has no role to play in the creation of the response.  
 
FLOWCHART OF HUMAN BRAIN  
 
 
COORDINATION IN PLANTS:  
 
Unlike animals, plants do not have a nervous system. Plants use chemical means for control 
and coordination. Many plant hormones are responsible for various kinds of movements in 
plants. Movements in plants can be divided into two main types, viz.  tropic movement and 
nastic movement.  
 
TROPIC MOVEMENT:  
 
The movements which are in a particular direction in relation to the stimulus are called tropic 
movements. Tropic movements happen as a result of growth of a plant part in a particular 
direction. The re are four types of tropic movements, viz. geotropic, phototropic, hydrotropic 
and thigmotropic.  
Geotropic Movement:  The growth in a plant part in response to the gravity is called 
geotropic movement. Roots usually show positive geotropic movement, i.e. t hey grow 
in the direction of the gravity. Stems usually show negative geotropic movement.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 59 - 
 
 
Phototropic Movement:  The growth in a plant part in response to light is called 
phototropic movement. Stems usually show positive phototropic movement, while roots  
usually show negative phototropic movement. If a plant is kept in a container in which 
no sunlight reaches and a hole in the container allows some sunlight; the stem finally 
grows in the direction of the sunlight. This happens because of a higher rate of cell 
division in the part of stem which is away from the sunlight. As a result, the stem bends 
towards the light. The heightened rate of cell division is attained by increased secretion 
of the plant hormone auxin in the part which is away from sunlight.  
 
Hydrotropic Movement: When roots grow in the soil, they usually grow towards the 
nearest source of water. This shows a positive hydrotrophic movement.  
Thigmotropic Movement: The growth in a plant part in response to touch is called 
thigmotropic movement. Such movements are seen in tendrils of climbers. The tendril 
grows in a way so as it can coil around a support. The differential rate of cell division in 
different parts of the tendril happens due to action of auxin.  
NASTIC MOVEMENT  
 
The movements which do  not depend on the direction from the stimulus acts are called nastic 
movement. For example; when someone touches the leaves of mimosa, the leaves droop. The 
drooping is independent of the direction from which the leaves are touched. Such movements 
usually  happen because of changing water balance in the cells. When leaves of mimosa are 
touched, the cells in the leaves lose water and become flaccid; resulting in drooping of leaves.  
Some Plant Hormones: Auxin, gibberellins and cytokinin promote growth in pla nt parts. 
Abscissic acid inhibits growth in a particular plant part.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 60 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 122  
 
Question 1: What are plant hormones?  
Answer : Plant hormones or phytohormones arenaturally -occurring organic substances. These 
are synthesized in one part of the plant body (in minute quantities) and are translocated to other 
parts when required. The five major types of phytohormones are auxins, gibberellins, 
cytokinins, abscisic acid, and ethylene.  
 
Question 2: How is the movement of leaves of the sensitive  plant different from the 
movement of a shoot towards light?  
Answer : The movement of leaves of the sensitive plant, Mimosa pudica or “touch me not”, 
occurs in response to touch or contact stimuli. This movement is independent of growth. The 
movement of sh oot towards light is known as phototropism. This type of movement is 
directional and is growth dependent.  
 
Question 3: Give an example of a plant hormone that promotes growth.  
Answer :  Auxin is an example of growth -promoting plant hormone.  
 
Question 4:  H ow do auxins promote the growth of a tendril around a support?  
Answer : Auxin is synthesized at the shoot tip. It helps the cell grow longer. When a tendril 
comes in contact with a support, auxin stimulates faster growth of the cells on the opposite 
side, so that the tendril forms a coil around the support. This makes the tendrils appear as a 
watch spring.  
 
Question 5:  Design an experiment to demonstrate hydrotropism.  
Answer : Take two small beakers and label them as A and B. Fill beaker A with water. Now  
make a cylindrical -shaped roll from a filter paper and keep it as a bridge between beaker A and 
beaker B, as shown in the figure. Attach few germinating seeds in the middle of the filter paper 
bridge. Now, cover the entire set -up with a transparent plasti c container so that the moisture is 
retained.  
 
Observation:  
The roots of the germinating seeds will grow towards beaker A.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 61 - 
 
 
This experiment demonstrates the phenomenon of hydrotropism.  
 
HORMONES IN ANIMALS  
The hormones in animals are produced by the endo crine glands, and they too play an important 
role in control and coordination.  
Hormones are chemical substances that control and coordinate activities of living organisms 
and also their growth. The term hormone was introduced by  Bayliss and Starling . Anim al 
hormones do not bring about directional growth depending on environmental cues, but promote 
controlled growth in various areas to maintain the body design. Thevarious endocrine glands in 
humans are hypothalamus, pineal gland, pituitary gland, thyroid gl and, parathyroid glands, 
thymus, pancreas, adrenal glands, ovary (in female) and testis (in males).  
 
FEATURES AND FUNCTIONS OF HORMONES:  
1. They are secreted  by the endocrine glands and are called ‘chemical messengers’.  
2. They are poured directly into blood str eam as endocrine glands have no ducts of their 
own (ductless glands).  
3. They usually have their effect at sites different from the sites where they are made. 
They act on specific areas called targetorgans.  
4. Hormones coordinate body activities and growth  
5. They are released in minute quantities  
 
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM  
 
The endocrine system is composed of several endocrine glands. A ductless gland is called 
endocrine gland. Endocrine gland secretes its product directly into the bloodstream. Hormones 
are produced in the endocrine glands. Hormone is mainly composed of protein. Hormones 
assist the nervous system in control and coordination. Nerves do not reach to every nook and 
corner of the body and hence hormones are needed to affect control and coordination in those 
parts. Moreover, unlike nervous control; hormonal control is somewhat slower.  
Different types of endocrine glands present in our body are the pituitary gland, the pineal 
gland, the hypothalamus, the thyroid, the parathyroid, the thymus, the adrenal gland, the 
pancreas, the testes and the ovary.  
 
The pituitary gland:  
       • It is a pea -shaped gland located at the base of the brain.  
       • It is considered to be master gland as it secretes many hormones to regulate the  
          organs as well as the other g lands.  
       • Different hormones secreted by this gland include Growth hormone, TSH, FSH,  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 62 - 
          LH, ACTH, MSH, Vasopressin and Oxytocin.  
 
The hypothalamus:  
       • It is a neuro -endocrine part of the brain.  
       • It links the nervous system and t he endocrine system through the pituitary gland.  
       • Different hormones secreted by this gland include TRH, GnRH, GHRH, CRH,  
         Stomatostatin, Dopamine.  
 
The thyroid gland:  
       • It is located in the neck, ventral to the larynx.  
       • It is the one of the largest endocrine glands.  
       • The principal hormones produced by this gland are triiodothyronine and thyroxine.  
 • Thyroxine is a hormone that regulates the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats 
in the body.   
Hyposecretion of thyroxine leads to cretinin in children, and myxoedema in adults.   
Hypersecretion of thyroxine leads to exopthalmic goitre in adults.   Goitre is caused due to 
deficiency of iodine in food.  Iodine is essential for the synthesis of thyroxine.  
 
Parathyroi d glands : 
       • These are two pairs of small, oval -shaped glands embedded on the dorsal surface of the 
thyroid gland present in the neck.  
       • They secrete parathormone.   Parathormone helps in regulation of calcium and phosphate 
ions in the bones an d blood.  
       • Hyposecretion leads to parathyroid tetany and hypersecretion causes osteoporosis.  
 
The adrenal glands:  
       • These are located above the kidneys and hence are called as suprarenal glands.  
       • Two regions of the adrenal gland are a drenal cortex and adrenal medulla.  
       • Adrenal cortex secretes the hormones like cortisol, aldosterone and androgens.  
       • Adrenal medulla secretes the hormones like adrenaline and noradrenaline.   
Adrenaline is also called the “hormone of fight or  flight,” or the emergency hormone. It 
prepares the body to face an emergency condition of physical stress, like danger, anger and 
excitement.  
 
The pancreas:  
 • It is located just below the stomach within the curve of the duodenum.  It is both exocrine 
and endocrine in function.  
       • It secretes hormones such as insulin, glucagon, somatostatin and pancreatic polypeptide.  
       • Insulin regulates the sugar level in our blood.  Insulin  secreted in small amounts 
increases the sugar level in our blood wh ich in turn  causes a disease called diabetes 
mellitus.  
 
Gonads:  
Two types of gonads present in human beings are female gonads and male gonads.  
 
Female gonads  
       • A pair of ovaries forms the gonads in female.   
       • Ovaries are the female sex organ s that lie one on either side of the abdominal cavity. 
Ovaries produce two hormones, namely, oestrogen and progesterone.  
       • Oestrogen controls the changes that occur during puberty, like feminine voice, soft skin 
and development in mammary glands.  
       • Progesterone controls the uterine changes in the menstrual cycle, and helps in the 
maintenance of pregnancy.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 63 - 
  
Male gonads  
       • A pair of testes forms the gonads in males.  
       • A pair of testes is the male sex organ located in the scrotum, wh ich is outside the 
abdomen.  
       • Testes produce the hormone testosterone.  
       • Testosterone controls the changes, which occur during puberty, like deeper voice, 
development of penis, facial and body hair.  
 
The pineal gland:  
       • It is located n ear the centre of the brain, dorsal to the diencephalon.  
       • It produces the hormone melatonin.  
       • Melatonin affects reproductive development, modulation of wake and sleep patterns, 
and seasonal functions.  
 
The thymus gland : 
       • It is locat ed in front of the heart, in the upper part of the sternum.  
       • It produces the hormone thymosine.  
       • It helps in the maturation of T -lymphocytes.  
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 64 - 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 65 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 125  
 
Question 1: How does chemical coordination take place in an imals?  
Answer : Chemical coordination takes place in animals with the help of hormones.Hormone is 
the chemical messenger that regulates the physiological processes in living organisms. It is 
secreted by glands. The regulation of physiological processes, an d control and coordination by 
hormones comes under the endocrine system. The nervous system along with the endocrine 
system in our body controls and coordinates the physiological processes.  
 
Question 2: Why is the use of iodised salt advisable?  
Answer : Iodine stimulates the thyroid gland to produce thyroxin hormone. It regulates 
carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism in our body. Deficiency of this hormone results in 
the enlargement of the thyroid gland. This can lead to goitre, a disease characterized by 
swollen neck. Therefore, iodised salt is advised for normal functioning of the thyroid gland.  
 
Question 3: How does our body respond when adrenaline is secreted into the blood?  
Answer : Adrenalin is a hormone secreted by the adrenal glands in case of an y danger or 
emergency or any kinds of stress. It is secreted directly into the blood and is transported to 
different parts of the body.  
 
When secreted in large amounts, it speeds up the heartbeat and hence supplies more oxygen to 
the muscles. The breathing  rate also increases due to contractions of diaphragm and rib 
muscles. It also increases the blood pressure. All these responses enable the body to deal with 
any stress or emergency.  
 
Question 4: Why are some patients of diabetes treated by giving injectio ns of insulin?  
Answer : Diabetes is a disease in which the level of sugar in the blood is too high. Insulin, a 
hormone secreted by the pancreas, helps in regulating the blood sugar levels. This is the reason 
why diabetic patients are treated by giving inj ections of insulin.  
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 125, 126  
 
Question 1: Which of the following is a plant hormone?  
(a) Insulin  
(b) Thyroxin  
(c) Oestrogen  
(d) Cytokinin  
Answer : (d) Cytokinin is a plant hormone.  
 
Question 2: The gap between two neurons is c alled a  
(a) dendrite.  
(b) synapse.  
(c) axon.  
(d) impulse.  
Answer : (b) The gap between two neurons is called a synapse.  
 
Question 3: The brain is responsible for  
(a) thinking.  
(b) regulating the heart beat.  
(c) balancing the body.  
(d) all of the above.  
Answer : (d) The brain is responsible for thinking, regulating the heart beat and balancing the 
body.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 66 - 
 Question 4: What is the function of receptors in our body? Think of situations where 
receptors do not work properly. What problems are likely to arise?  
Answ er : Receptors are sensory structures (organs/tissues or cells) present all over the body. 
The receptors are either grouped in case of eye or ear, or scattered in case of skin.  
 
Functions of receptors:  
(i) They sense the external stimuli such as heat or pa in. 
(ii) They also trigger an impulse in the sensory neuron which sends message to the spinal cord.  
 
When the receptors are damaged, the external stimuli transferring signals to the brain are not 
felt. For example, in the case of damaged receptors, if we a ccidentally touch any hot object, 
then our hands might get burnt as damaged receptors cannot perceive the external stimuli of 
heat and pain.  
 
Question 5:  Draw the structure of a neuron and explain its function.  
Answer : Neurons are the functional units of  the nervous system. The three main parts of a 
neuron are axon, dendrite, and cell body.  
 
Functions of the three parts of a neuron:  
Axon: It conducts messages away from the cell body.  
 
Dendrite: It receives information from axon of another cell and conduc ts the messages 
towards the cell body.  
 
Cell body: It contains nucleus, mitochondria, and other organelles. It is mainly concerned with 
the maintenance and growth.  
 
Question 6: How does phototropism occur in plants?  
Answer : The growth movement in plants i n response to light stimulus is known as 
phototropism. The shoots show positive phototropism and the roots show negative 
phototropism. This means that the shoots bend towards the source of light whereas the roots 
bend away from the light source.  
 
Some exam ples of phototropism are as follows:  
 (a) The flower head of sunflower is positively phototropic and hence it moves from east to 
west along with the sun.  
 (b) The ovary stalk of groundnut is positively phototropic before fertilization and becomes 
negativel y phototropic after fertilization, so that the fruit is formed underground.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 67 - 
 Question 7: Which signals will get disrupted in case of a spinal cord injury?  
Answer : The reflex arc connections between the input and output nerves meet in a bundle in 
the spinal  cord. In fact, nerves from all over the body meet in a bundle in the spinal cord on 
their way to the brain. In case of any injury to the spinal cord, the signals coming from the 
nerves as well as the signals coming to the receptors will be disrupted.  
 
Question 8:  How does chemical coordination occur in plants?  
Answer : In animals, control and coordination occur with the help of nervous system. 
However, plants do not have a nervous system.  
 
Plants respond to stimuli by showing movements. The growth, develo pment, and responses to 
the environment in plants is controlled and coordinated by a special class of chemical 
substances known as hormones. These hormones are produced in one part of the plant body 
and are translocated to other needy parts. For example, a  hormone produced in roots is 
translocated to other parts when required. The five major types of phytohormone are auxins, 
gibberellins, cytokinins, abscisic acid, and ethylene. These phytohormones are either growth 
promoters (such as auxins, gibberellins, cytokinins, and ethylene) or growth inhibitors such as 
abscisic acid.  
 
Question 9:  What is the need for a system of control and coordination in an organism?  
Answer : The maintenance of the body functions in response to changes in the body by 
working toget her of various integrated body systems is known as coordination. All the 
movements that occur in response to stimuli are carefully coordinated and controlled. In 
animals, the control and coordination movements are provided by nervous and muscular 
systems. The nervous system sends messages to and away from the brain. The spinal cord 
plays an important role in the relay of messages. In the absence of this system of control and 
coordination, our body will not be able to function properly. For example, when we 
accidentally touch a hot utensil, we immediately withdraw our hand. In the absence of nerve 
transmission, we will not withdraw our hand and may get burnt.  
 
Question 10:  How are involuntary actions and reflex actions different from each other?  
Answer : Involuntary actions cannot be consciously controlled. For example, we cannot 
consciously control the movement of food in the alimentary canal. These actions are however 
directly under the control of the brain. On the other hand, the reflex actions such as clo sing of 
eyes immediately when bright light is focused show sudden response and do not involve any 
thinking. This means that unlike involuntary actions, the reflex actions are not under the 
control of brain.  
 
Question 11: Compare and contrast nervous and ho rmonal mechanisms for control and 
coordination in animals.  
Answer :  
 
Nervous system mechanism  Hormonal system mechanism  
1. The information is conveyed in the form 
of electric impulse.  1. The information is conveyed in the form 
of chemical messengers.  
2. The axon s and dendrites transmit the 
information through a coordinated effort.   2. The information is transmitted or 
transported through blood.  
3. The flow of information is rapid and the 
response is quick.    3. The information travels slowly and the 
response is slow.  
4. Its effects are short lived.  4. It has prolonged effects.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 68 - 
 Question 12: What is the difference between the manner in which movement takes place 
in a sensitive plant and the movement in our legs?  
Answer :  
 
Movement in sensitive plants  Movement in our legs  
1. The movementthat takes place in a 
sensitive plant such as Mimosa pudica 
occurs in response to touch (stimulus).   1. Movement in our legs is an example of 
voluntary actions.  
 
2. For this movement, the information is 
transmitted from cell to cell by electro -
chemical signals as plants do not have any 
specialised tissue for conduction of 
impulses.   2. The signal or messages for these actions 
are passed to the brain and hence are 
consciously controlled.  
3. For this movement to occur, the plant cells 
change shape by changing t he amount of 
water in them.  3. In animal muscle cells, some proteins are 
found which allow the movement to 
occur.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 96 - 
  
CHAPTER – 8 
 
HOW DO ORGANISMS REPRODUCE?  
 
 
 
REPRODUCTION  
Reproduction is an integral feature of all living beings. The process by which a living being 
produces its own like is called reproduction.  
 
IMPORTANCE OF REPRODUCTION:  
Reproduction is important for each species, because this is the only wa y for a living being to 
continue its lineage. Apart from being important for a particular individual, reproduction is also 
important for the whole ecosystem. Reproduction helps in maintaining a proper balance among 
various biotic constituents of the ecosys tem. Moreover, reproduction also facilitates evolution 
because variations come through reproduction; over several generations.  
 
TYPES OF REPRODUCTION:  
 
There are two main types, viz. asexual and sexual reproduction.  
 
Asexual Reproduction:  When a single par ent is involved and no gamete formation takes 
place; the method is called asexual reproduction. No meiosis happens during asexual 
reproduction.  
 
Sexual Reproduction:  When two parents are involved and gamete formation takes; the 
method is called sexual repr oduction. Meiosis happens during gamete formation; which is an 
important step of sexual reproduction.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 128  
 
Q1. What is the importance of DNA copying in reproduction?  
Ans:  
The importance of DNA copying during reproduction is that:  
(i) It is responsible for the transmission of parental characteristic to its offsprings.  
(ii) It also leads to certain genetic variation.  
 
Q2. Why is variation beneficial to the species but not necessarily for the individual?  
Ans:  
Variations allow organis ms to exist in diverse habitats or niches. In the absence of variations, a 
species may be restricted to particular area. If this area gets drastically altered, due to various 
natural or man -made causes, the species may be wiped out. However, if some variat ions were 
present in a few individuals, these colonize other habitats and could survive. But if variations 
are present in a single organism there would be very little for it to survive.  
 
 
ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION  
 
MODES OF REPRODUCTION USED BY SINGLE ORGANISMS  
Modes of reproduction involving a single parent, without involving gametes. These are known 
as asexual modes of reproduction.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 97 - 
 Organisms can reproduce asexually in many ways. Some of them are given here.  
 
FISSION  
 
BINARY FISSION  
 
Most of the unicellular an imals prefer this method for reproduction. These organisms 
reproduce by binary fission; especially when conditions are favourable, i.e. adequate amount of 
food and moisture is available. Binary fission is somewhat similar to mitosis. The mother cell 
divide s into two daughter cells; and each daughter cell begins its life like a new individual. The 
parent generation ceases to exist, after binary fission. Amoeba is a very good example of the 
organism which reproduces by binary fission.  
 
MULTIPLE FISSION  
 
When  conditions become unfavourable, i.e. food, moisture, proper temperature, etc. are not 
available; this is the preferred mode of reproduction by unicellular organisms. The organism 
develops a thick coating around itself. This is called cyst. The cyst helps the organism to tide 
over the bad phase. The nucleus divides into several nuclei and each daughter nucleus is 
surrounded by a membrane. All metabolic activities stop in the organism, after cyst formation. 
When favourable conditions return, the cyst dissolv es or breaks down; releasing the daughter 
nuclei. The daughter nuclei; in turn; grow into new individuals. Plasmodium and entamoeba 
undergo cyst stage, when they are not in the body of their prime host, i.e. humans.  
 
 
FRAGMENTATION  
 
In multicellular organ isms with simple body organization, simple reproductive methods have 
been noticed. Reproduction by fragmentation is seen in filamentous algae, e.g. spirogyra. In 
Spirogyra algae, the plant body breaks up into smaller fragments. Each fragment grows into a 
new individual.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 98 - 
 
 
REGENERATION  
If the individual is somehow cut or broken up into many pieces, many of these pieces grow 
into separate individuals. For example, simple animals like Hydra and Planaria can be cut into  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 99 - 
 any number of pieces and each piece grows into a complete organism. This is known as 
regeneration (see the below figures). Regeneration is carried out by specialised cells. These 
cells proliferate and make large numbers of cells.  
 
BUDDING  
Organisms such as Hydra use regenerative cells for re production in the process of budding. In 
Hydra, a bud develops as an outgrowth due to repeated cell division at one specific site (see 
below figure). These buds develop into tiny individuals and when fully mature, detach from the 
parent body and become new  independent individuals.  
 
 
VEGETATIVE PROPAGATION  
Vegetative propagation is the ability of plants to reproduce by bringing forth new plants from 
existing vegetative structures without sexual reproduction.  
Some examples of vegetative propagation are given  below.  
 
Tuber of Potato:  The potato tuber is a modified stem. Many notches can be seen on the 
surface of potato. These are called ‘eyes’ of potato. Each ‘eye’ of a potato can give rise to a 
new potato plant. Farmers utilize this capability of potatoes to grow potato more quickly; 
which is not possible by using the seeds of potato.  
 
Modified roots of Carrot and Sweet Potato:  Carrot and 
sweet potato are examples of modifications of roots; for food 
storage. These roots can give rise to new plants; when kept  
under the soil.  
 
Rhizomes of Ginger and Turmeric:  Rhizomes are examples 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 100 - 
 of modified underground stems for food storage. These contain nodes, internodes and scaly 
leaves. When buried under the soil, the rhizomes produce new plants.  
       
  
Leaf of Bryoph yllum:  Leaves of bryophyllum have notches on the margin. If a leaf is put 
under the soil, small saplings grow from the notches on the leaf margin. (see above figure)  
 
Artificial Vegetative Propagation:  Man has used artificial vegetative propagation to grow  
many plants. This has enabled farmers and horticulturists to grow many plants in shorter 
duration and has helped them to earn more profit. Artificial vegetative propagation has also 
helped in developing many new varieties of plants. Stem cutting, layering  and grafting are the 
preferred means of artificial vegetative propagation.  
 
 
SPORE FORMATION  
Rhizopus produces hundreds of microscopic reproductive units called spores. When the spore 
case (also called sporangium) bursts, the spores spreads into air. The se air -borne spores land on 
food or soil, under favourable conditions like damp and warm conditions, they germinate and 
produce new individuals. Most of the fungi like Rhizopus, Mucor etc., Bacteria and non -
flowering plants such as ferns and mosses reprodu ce by the method of spore formation.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 101 - 
 
 
 
ADVANTAGES OF ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION:  
 
The organism does not have to depend on another organism for carrying out reproduction; 
because a single parent is needed.  
It takes less time than sexual reproduction and hence mo re number of offspring can be 
produced in shorter time.  
The offspring are exact clones of their parent.  
Desirable characteristics can be easily incorporated into plants with artificial vegetative 
propagation.  
 
DISADVANTAGES OF ASEXUAL REPRODUCTION:  
 
As a s ingle parent is involved, so there is negligible chance of variation.  
In most of the cases in simple organisms, the parent generation ceases to exist after asexual 
reproduction.  
Asexual reproduction cannot give rise to biodiversity which is important for a  h e a l t h y  
ecosystem.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 133  
 
Q1. How does binary fission differ from multiple fission?  
Ans:  
S. 
No. Binary Fission  Multiple Fission  
1 In binary fission, the parent organism 
splits to form two new organisms.  In multiple fission, the p arents 
organism splits to form many new 
organisms at the same time.  
2 It takes place during favourable 
environmental conditions.  It takes place during unfavourable 
environmental conditions.  
3 It takes place in organisms like  
Amoeba, Paramecium, etc . It takes place in organisms like  
Plasmodium . 
 
Q2. How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores?  
Ans: Spores are tiny, spherical, asexual reproductive bodies which under favourable 
conditions, like damp and warm conditions, germinate to pr oduce new plants. They are 
covered by the hard protective wall, which enables the plant to survive unfavourable 
conditions.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 102 - 
 Q3. Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give rise to new 
individuals through regeneration?  
Ans:  
Multicellular  organisms cannot reproduce by cell because they are not simple random 
collection of cells. In them, specialised cells are organized as tissues and tissues are organised 
into organs, which then have to be kept at different positions in the body. Cell -by-cell division 
would be impractical. Multicellular organisms, therefore, require to use more complex ways of 
reproduction.  
 
Moreover, simple multicellular organisms possess special type of tissues which have the 
potential to grow into a new organism but compl ex multicellular organisms have no such 
specialised cells.  
 
Q4. Why is vegetative propagation practised for growing some types of plants?  
Ans:  
Vegetative propagation method is used for growing certain plants which do not produce viable 
seeds. It is also us ed for growing of plants bearing superior traits, because they produce 
genetically identical plants. It is also used for growing plants which require longer time to 
grow and become mature. Plant which require lot of care during early stages of development 
are also grown by this method.  
 
Q5. Why is DNA copying an essential part of the process of reproduction?  
Ans:  
Chromosome in the nucleus of a cell contain information for inheritance of features from 
parent to next generation in the form of DNA. The DNA in the cell nucleus is the information 
source of making proteins. Therefore, a basic event in reproduction is creation of DNA copy 
for the next generation.  
 
SEXUAL REPRODUCTION  
 
SEXUAL REPRODUCTION IN PLANTS  
Sexual reproduction is the process in which two com ponents ( male and female) are involved 
to produce offsprings of their own kind.  
A bull alone cannot produce new calves. It needs a cow. Female sheep alone cannot produce 
new ones. It needs a male sheep.  
Both the sexes, male and female, are needed to 
produce new offspring.  
 
PARTS OF A T YPICAL FLOWER  
A flower is a modified shoot with a limited growth. 
Flowers vary in size, shape,structure and colour.  
The main part s of a flower are,  
1. Calyx  
2. Corolla  
3. Androecium and  
4. Gynoecium.  
 
Androecium is the male part of a flower,and 
Gynoecium is the female part. 
 
Androecium is a group of stamens. Each Stamen 
consists of a stalk called the filament and a small 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 103 - 
 bag like structure called the anther at the tip. The pollen grains are contained in the anther 
within the pollen sacs.  
 
Gynoecium  
Gynoecium is the female part of the flower and consists of the carpels or ovary. Gynoceium 
has three parts 1) Stigma 2) Style and 3) Ovary. The ovary contains the ovules and each ovule 
carries within it an embryo sac, within which l ies the egg cell or the female gamete.  
 
The sexual reproduction in flowering plants involves  
1. Pollination    2. Fertilization  
 
1. POLLINATION  
Transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma is called pollination. Pollen grains are 
transferred main ly by wind, water and insects. They are called as pollinating agents. 
Pollination is the first and important event in the development of the fruit and seed. Pollination 
is followed by fertilization.  
 
TYPES OF POLLINATION  
Pollination is of two types. They a re 
1. Self pollination   2. Cross pollination  
 
SELF POLLINATION  
Self pollination is also known as autogamy. The transfer of pollen grains from the anther of a 
flower to the stigma of the same flower or another flower of the same plant is known as self 
pollination.  
 
 
 
ADVANTAGES OF SELF POLLINATION  
Self pollination is certain in bisexual flowers.  
Flowers need not depend on agents of pollination.  
There is no wastage of pollen grains.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 104 - 
  
DISADVANTAGES OF SELF POLLINATION  
The seeds are less in number.  
Endosperm i s minute. Therefore, the seeds produce weak plants.  
New varieties of plants cannot be produced resulting in the degradation of the plant.  
 
CROSS POLLINATION (ALLOGAMY)  
The transfer of pollen grains of a flower to the stigma of another flower of a different  plant of 
the same species is called cross pollination or allogamy.  
 
ADVANTAGES OF CROSS POLLINATION  
The seeds produced as a result of cross pollination develop, germinate properly and grow 
into better plants, i.e., cross pollination leads to the productio n of new varieties.  
More viable seeds are produced.  
 
AGENTS OF CROSS POLLINATION  
In order to bring about cross pollination, it is necessary that the pollen should be carried from 
one flower to another of a different plant. This takes place through agency o f animals, insects, 
wind and water.  
Pollination by birds (Ornithophily)  
Pollination by insects and animals  
 
ZOOPHILY  
Animals and insects – Birds, squirrels and insects are attracted to the bright petals of the 
flowers. These flowers are also large in size and have a sweet smell. Some of these flowers 
have nectar and a sweet scent. This is the most common of all methods of pollination. This 
kind of pollination is called Zoophily. (Pollination by animals and birds).  
 
ANEMOPHILY (POLLINATION BY WIND)  
The flowe rs pollinated by air are mostly small in size and without any attractive colour, smell 
and nectar. They produce a large number of pollen grains to make up for the wastage of pollen 
in times of transit.  
 
The pollen grains are dry and powdery, and hence are easily carried by the wind. Some pollen 
grains even have wings. Stigmas are large and protruding, even branched and feathery. 
e.g.Maize. Flowers pollinated by wind are called Anemophilous, e.g. Grass and pine.  
 
POLLINATION BY WATER (HYDROPHILY)  
This pollin ation takes place in water plants or plants that are adapted to water habitat. e.g. 
Vallisneria. This pollination is known as hydrophily. The flowers are small and inconspicuous.  
 
FERTILIZATION  
Pollination is the transfer of pollen grains 
from the anther to the stigma. Each pollen 
grain has protective walls called exine and 
intine. The outer wall exine is thick and it has 
small pores called germination pores. The 
inner wall is thin and elastic.  
 
GERMINATION OF POLLEN GRAIN  
If pollen grain falls on a suitab le stigma, it 
starts germinating. A mature pollen consists of 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 105 - 
 two cells. The larger one is vegetative cell and the smaller one is generative cell. The 
vegetative cell starts growing and emerges through the germination pore. It develops through 
the style as  a long tube known as pollen tube. The generative cell gets into the tube and divides 
into two male gametes (sperms).  
 
PROCESS OF FERTILIZATION  
The pollen tube enters into the embryo sac through micropyle. At this time, the pollen tube 
bursts open, gametes  released from the pollen tube and enter into the embryosac. One of the 
gametes fuses with the egg, and the other fuses with the secondary nucleus. The fusion of a 
male gamete with egg is known as fertilization. The fertilized egg is known as zygote which 
develops into embryo.  
 
DOUBLE FERTILIZATION  
The other male gamete fuses with the secondary nucleus. The secondary nucleus is diploid in 
nature.  
 
The fusion of this nucleus with the second male gamete is known as triple fusion. The triple 
fusion nucleus i s called endosperm nucleus because it develops into endosperm.  
 
Endosperm is a nutritive tissue meant for the development of the embryo. The process of 
fusion of a male gamete with egg and the other gamete with secondary nucleus is known as 
double fertiliz ation.  
 
POST FERTILIZATION CHANGES :  
The ovule develops into seed.  
The integuments of the ovule develop into seed coats.  
The ovary enlarges and develops into fruit.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 106 - 
 REPRODUCTION IN HUMAN BEINGS  
 
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM  
 
The male reproductive system in hum an beings is composed of following parts:  
 
Testis:  There is a pair of testes; which lie in a skin pouch; called scrotum. Scrotum is 
suspended outside the body; below the abdominal cavity. This helps in maintaining the 
temperature of testes below the body t emperature. This is necessary for optimum sperm 
production. Testis primarily serves the function of sperm production. Sperms are the male 
gametes. Apart from that, testis also produces testosterone. Testosterone is also called the male 
hormone, as it is re sponsible for developing certain secondary sexual characters in boys.  
 
 
 
Vas Deferens:  Vas deferens is the tube which carries sperms to the seminal vesicle.  
 
Seminal Vesicle:  This is the place where sperms are stored. Secretions from the seminal 
vesicle a nd prostate gland add up to make the semen.  
 
Penis:  It is a muscular organ which serves the genitor -urinary functions. The urethra works as 
the common passage for urine as well as for sperms.  
 
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM  
 
The female reproductive system in h uman beings is composed of following parts:  
 
Uterus:  This is pear -shaped hollow muscular organ. Uterus is the place where the embryo gets 
implanted and develops into a newborn baby. The wall of the uterus provides safety and 
nutrition to the growing foetus . 
 
Fallopian Tubes:  One fallopian tube comes out from each side at the top of the uterus. The 
fallopian tubes end in finger -like structures; called flimbriae. Fertilization happens in the 
fallopian tube.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 107 - 
 
 
Ovary:  Th e re  a re  tw o ov a ri e s ;  on e  n e a r e a c h  f a l l op ian tube. Ovary produces the eggs or the 
female gametes. All the eggs are produces by the ovary when the female child is still in the 
womb. One egg matures in each ovulation cycle and is released from the ovary. The egg is 
caught by the flimbriae and trans ferred to the fallopian tube.  
 
Vagina:  The cervix (mouth of the uterus) opens into the vagina. Vagina is a muscular tube -like 
organs; which serves as the passage for the sperms and also as the canal during the child birth.  
 
PUBERTY  
Human beings are complex  animals and hence there is a distinct phase in their life cycle which 
marks the onset and attainment of sexual maturity. This period is called puberty. It usually 
starts at around 10 – 11 years of age in girls and at around 12 – 13 years of age in boys. I t 
usually ends at around 18th year of age in girls and at around 19th year of age in boys. Since 
the years during puberty end in ‘teens’; hence this phase is also called teenage.  
 
Changes in Boys during Puberty:  The boys suddenly grow in height dramaticall y. Voice 
becomes deep and the Adam’s apple becomes prominent. Shoulders become broad and body 
becomes muscular. Facial hairs begin to grow. Hairs also grow under the armpit and in the 
pubic region.  
 
Changes in Girls during Puberty:  T h e  v o i c e  b e c o m e s  t h i n .  Shoulders and hip become 
rounded. Breasts get enlarged. Hairs grow under the armpit and in the pubic region.  
 
Sexual Dimorphism:  The physical dissimilarities in the male and female of a species which 
give them different appearances is called sexual dimorp hism.  
 
Secondary Sexual Characters:  Features which highlight sexual dimorphism are called 
secondary sexual characters.  
 
Menstruation:  Menstruation is a trait which is unique to humans and some primates. During 
each ovulation cycle, the uterus prepares itse lf in anticipation of a possible pregnancy. The 
uterine wall develops an additional lining. When the egg is not fertilized, it gets disintegrated 
and so does the additional lining in the uterine wall. The fragments of disintegrated tissues are 
shed; along with blood. This is observed in the form of bleeding through the vagina which can 
last from 3 to 7 days. The whole sequence of events during an ovulation cycle is called 
menstrual cycle. The bleeding which occurs for few days is called menstruation. The fi rst 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 108 - 
 menstrual flow is called menarche and the last menstrual flow (which happens in the late 40s) 
is called menopause.  
 
REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH  
 
Human beings are different than other animals because they have the power of thinking. They 
have to obey certain mo ral values and need to behave sensibly in most of the aspects of life. 
Beginning of puberty does not mean that a person is psychologically ready for the process of 
reproduction. For a human being, reproduction involves more than just producing an offspring . 
As any act of sex has the potential of fertilization, so taking care of contraception becomes 
important. Moreover, the act of sex also has the potential of creating many sexually transmitted 
diseases. Examples of STDs are; gonorrhea, Herpes, syphilis, AI DS, Hepatitis B. AIDS and 
Hepatitis B are incurable till date. Even the curable STDs are potential dangerous; not only 
physically but also psychologically.  
Reproductive health involves preventing the chances of STDs and preventing unwanted 
children. Reprod uctive health means a couple should be able to enjoy the reproductive phase of 
its life; without taking the burden of gigantic family.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 140  
 
Q1. How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation?  
Ans:  
S. 
No. Pollinati on Fertilization  
1 The transfer of pollen grains from anther 
to the stigma of a flower is called 
pollination.  The fusion of male and female 
gamete to form zygote is called 
fertilisation.  
2 It involves only the male gamete  
(pollen grain).  It involves both  male and female 
gametes.  
 
Q2. What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland?  
Ans:  
Secretions from seminal vesicles and prostate gland provide nutrition to the sperms and make 
their transport easier by providing them a fluid medium.  
 
Q3. What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty?  
Ans:  
Changes seen in girls at the time of puberty are as follows:  
(i) Growth of hair in armpits and public region.  
(ii) Mammary glands (breast) develop and hips broaden.  
(iii) Uterus, vagina, Fall opian tube enlarge and pelvis widens. Menstruation and ovulation also 
starts.  
Q4. How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother’s body?  
Ans:  
The embryo gets nutrition from the mothers blood with the help of special tissue called 
placenta. This is a disc -like tissue which develops between the uterine wall and embryo. It has 
villi on embryo side of the tissue. On the mothers side are blood spaces which the villi. This 
gives a large surface area for oxygen and glucose to pass from the mother to the em bryo.  
 
Q5. If a women is using a copper -T, will it help in protecting her from sexually 
transmitted diseases?  
Ans:  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 127 - 
 CHAPTER – 9 
 
HEREDITY AND EVOLUTION  
 
 
ACCUMULATION OF VARIATION DURING R EPRODUCTION  
 
By virtue of being the progeny of the parent, the progeny individual, need not just be the 
replica of what its parents are. (Inheritance of characters from the parents to the progeny (i.e. , 
Heredity) ensures the passing of the parental charac ters to the progeny). The difference or 
change in the characteristics between the individuals is called Variation. Human population 
shows a great deal of variation.  
Inheritance from the previous generation provides both a common basic body design, and 
subtle changes in it, for the next generation. The second generation will have differences that 
they inherit from the first generation, as well as newly created differences.  
 
The below figures shows Creation of diversity over succeeding generations. The origin al 
organism at the top will give rise to, say, two individuals, similar in body design, but with 
subtle differences. Each of them, in turn, will give rise to two individuals in the next 
generation. Each of the four individuals in the bottom row will be dif ferent from each other. 
While some of these differences will be unique, others will be inherited from their respective 
parents, who were different from each other.  
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 143  
 
Q1. If a trait A exists in 10% of a population of an asexu ally reproducing species and a 
trait B exists in 60% of the same population, which trait is likely to have arisen earlier?  
Ans: Trait ‘B’.  
Percentage of any gene in a population increases from generation to generation.  
Q2. How does the creation of variatio ns in a species promote survival?  
Ans:  
During reproduction (also inaccuracies in DNA replications), many variations occur in the 
offspring. Some individuals have more favourable variations than the other. Such individuals 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 128 - 
 survive and pass these variations on their progeny. For example, let us consider the population 
of beetles. Due to certain conditions, a colour arised during reproduction so that one beetle is 
green in colour (instead of red). This beetle can pass this colour to its progeny. Crows now 
cannot see these green -coloured beetles on green leaves and hence, their population become 
more than that of red -coloured beetles.  
 
HEREDITY  
 
The progeny produced through the reproductive process is similar to its parents, in body 
design, function etc., The ru les of heredity determine the process by which the traits and the 
characteristics are relatively inherited.  
 
 “The inheritance of characteristics through generation is called heredity”  
 
The inheritable characteristics may be morphological/anatomical/physio logical/  reproductive 
and are also known as traits.  
 
If we take a very close look at the rules of inheritance, both father and mother contribute equal 
amount of genetic material to the child. This means that each trait can be influenced by both 
paternal a nd maternal genetic material – i.e, DNA.  
 
RULES FOR THE INHERITANCE OF TRAITS – MENDEL’S 
CONTRIBUTIONS  
 
Gregor Johann Mendel (1822 -1884) worked out the first ever scientific experimental study on 
heredity.  
Mendel, an Austrian Augustinian monk observed vari ations in the characteristics of garden pea 
plant (Pisum sativum) which he had cultivated in his monastery garden. Mendel was curious to 
find out the results of crossing of pea plants with the variation in traits. The visible contrasting 
characters that Me ndel observed in the garden pea plants were given below:  
 
Seed shape - Round/Wrinkled  
 
 
 
Seed colour - Yellow/Green  
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 129 - 
 Flower colour - Violet / White  
 
Pod shape - Full / Constricted  
 
Pod colour - Green / Yellow  
 
Flower position - Axillary / Terminal  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 130 - 
 Stem height - Tall / Dwarf  
 
 
 
MENDEL’S MONOHYBRID CROSS  
 
Mendel selected the garden pea plant, Pisum sativum for his experiments. He selected tall and 
dwarf plants and allowed them to grow naturally. As pea plants produce seeds only by self 
pollination , he observed that tall plants produced always tall plants generation after generation 
under natural condition.Similarly, dwarf plants produced always dwarf plants generation after 
generation. Hence, he termed the tall and dwarf plants as wild types or pur e breeding varieties.  
 
Then he crossed a tall plant with a dwarf plant, produced progeny and calculated the 
percentage of tallness and dwarfness in subsequent generations. When a pure breeding tall 
plant was crossed with a pure breeding dwarf plant, all pl ants were tall in the first filial 
generation (F1) i.e., there was not any medium height plants or dwarf plants.  
This means that only one of the parental traits were seen and not the mixture of the two. When 
such a F1 tall plant was allowed to have self po llination, both the tall and dwarf plants 
appeared in second filial generation (F2). in the ratio of 3:1.  
This indicates that both tallness and dwarfness were inherited in the F1 plants but only tallness 
trait was expressed.  
 
The first experiment of Mendel  considering the inheritance of a single trait (Height of the plant 
Tall/Dwarf) is called Monohybrid Cross.  
 
Expression of morphological characters as tall or dwarf plant, violet or white flower is called 
Phenotype.  
 
The expression of gene (or Chromosomal make up) of an individual for a particular trait is 
called Genotype.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 131 - 
 
 
 
POINTS TO REMEMBER:  
 
Heredity:  The passing of traits from the parents to offspring is called heredity. Genotype:  
The complete set of genes in an organism’s genome is called genotype.  
Phenotype:  The observable characters in an organism make the phenotype. Phenotype is a 
result of genotype’s interaction with the environment. Due to this reason, many phenotypes 
are not inheritable.  
Acquired Traits:  Traits; which are acquired due to intera ction with the environment; are 
called acquired traits. Acquired traits are not inheritable.  
Inheritable Traits:  Traits; which can be expressed in subsequent generations; are called 
inheritable traits. Such traits bring a change in the genotype of the org anism and hence 
become inheritable.  
 
MENDEL'S FIRST LAW  
Law of Segregation: Every individual possesses a pair of alleles for a particular trait. During 
gamete formation, a gamete receives only one trait from the alleles. A particular trait can be 
dominant or recessive in a particular generation.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 132 - 
 DIHYBRID CROSS  
The cross in which two pairs of characters are studied is called dihybrid cross. In his second 
experiment, Mendel used dihybrid cross.  
 
Let us take example between plants with round and green seeds a nd those with wrinkled and 
yellow seeds. The genotype of round and green seeds is shown by RRyy and that of wrinkled 
and yellow seeds is shown by rrYY. In the F1 generation, all plants produced round and yellow 
seeds; which means that wrinkled texture was the recessive character and so was the green 
colour of seeds. When plants of F1 generation were allowed to self pollinate; it was observed 
that most of the plants in F2 generation produced round and yellow seeds. Some plants 
produces round green seeds, som e produced wrinkled yellow seeds and some produced 
wrinkled green seeds. The ratio was 9 : 3 : 3 : 1; as shown in the below figure.  
 
MENDEL’S SECOND LAW:  
Law of Independent Assortment: Alleles of different 
characters separate independent from each other 
during gamete formation.  
In the above example; alleles of texture were 
assorted independently from those of seed colour.  
 
SEX DETERMINATION IN HUMANS:  
 
Somatic cells in human beings contain 23 pairs of 
chromosomes. Out of them the 23rd pair is 
composed of different types of chromosomes which 
are named as X and Y chromosomes. The 23rd pair 
contains one X and one Y chromosome in a male. 
On the other hand, the 23rd pair in a female contains 
X chromosomes. This means that all the eggs would 
have X chromosome as  the 23rd chromosome, while 
a sperm may have either X or Y chromosome as the 
23rd chromosome. When a sperm with X 
chromosome fertilizes the egg, the resulting zygote 
would develop into a female child. When a sperm 
with Y chromosome fertilizes the egg, the resulting 
zygote would develop into a male child.  
 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 133 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 147  
 
Q1. How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits may be dominant or recessive?  
Ans:  
Mendel crossed a pure tall pea plant (TT) with pure dwarf pea plant (tt) and observed that  all 
the progeny were hybrid tall (Tt), i.e., only one of the trait was able to express itself in the F 1 
generation, which is the dominant trait. The other trait called the recessive trait remain 
suppressed.  
 
However, when he self crossed plants of F 1 generation, he observed that one fourth of the 
plants were dwarf and three fourth were tall.  
 
 
Q2. How do Mendel’s experiments show that traits are inherited independently?  
Ans: Please refer the above section DIHYBRID CROSS  
 
Q3. A man with blood group A mar ries a woman with blood group O and their daughter 
has blood group O. Is this information enough to tell you which of the traits – blood 
group A or O – is dominant? Why or why not?  
Ans:  
This shows that blood group ‘O’ is dominant and 
‘A’ is recessive becau se blood group ‘O’ was able to 
express itself in heterozygous condition, due to 
which the progeny had blood group ‘O’.  
 
Q4. How is the sex of the child determined in 
human beings?  
Ans:  
Somatic cells in human beings contain 23 pairs of 
chromosomes. Out of t hem the 23rd pair is 
composed of different types of chromosomes which 
are named as X and Y chromosomes. The 23rd pair 
contains one X and one Y chromosome in a male. 
On the other hand, the 23rd pair in a female contains 
X chromosomes. This means that all th e eggs would 
have X chromosome as the 23rd chromosome, while 
a sperm may have either X or Y chromosome as the 
23rd chromosome. When a sperm with X 
chromosome fertilizes the egg, the resulting zygote 
would develop into a female child. When a sperm 
with Y ch romosome fertilizes the egg, the resulting 
zygote would develop into a male child.  

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 134 - 
 EVOLUTION  
The change in inherited traits in biological population over subsequent generations is called 
evolution. Scientists have proven that life evolved in the form of si mple unicellular organisms 
on this earth; and all the organisms which are present today have evolved from a common 
ancestor. The idea of evolution is based on the premise of a common ancestry.  
 
Let us consider a group of twelve beetles. They live in bushes  on green leaves. Their 
population will grow by sexual reproduction. So they were able to generate variations in 
population. Let us assume crows eat these red beetles. If the crows eat more Red beetles their 
population slowly reduced.  
Let us think of diffe rent situations.  
 
Situation -1: 
In this situation a colour variation arises during reproduction. So that there appears one beetle 
that is green in colour instead of red.  
 
More over this green coloured beetle passes it’s colour to it’s off spring (Progeny).  So that all 
its progeny are green. Crows cannot see the green coloured beetles on green leaves of the 
bushes and therefore crows cannot eat them. But crows can see the red beetles and eat them. As 
a result there are more and more green beetles than red on es which decrease in their number.  
The variation of colour in beetle ‘green ’ gave a survival advantage to ‘green beetles’ than red 
beetles. In other words it was naturally selected.  
We can see that the ‘natural selection ’ was exerted by the crows. The mor e crows there are, the 
more red beetles would be eaten and the more number of green beetles in the population would 
be. Thus the natural selection is directing evolution in the beetle population. It results in 
adaptation in the beetle population to fit in their environment better.  
 
Situation -2: 
In this situation a colour variation occurs again in its progeny during reproduction, but now it 
results in ‘Blue’ colour beetles instead of ‘red’ colour beetle. This blue colour beetle can pass 
its colour to its pro geny. So that all its progeny are blue.  
 
Crows can see blue coloured beetles on the green leaves of the bushes and the red ones as well. 
And therefore crows can eat both red and blue coloured beetles. In this case there is no survival 
advantage for blue c oloured beetles as we have seen in case of green coloured beetles.  
What happens initially in the population, there are a few blue beetles, but most are red. Imagine 
at this point an elephant comes by and stamps on the bushes where the beetles live. This ki lls 
most of the beetles. By chance the few beetles survived are mostly blue. Again the beetle 
population slowly increases. But in the beetle population most of them are in blue colour.  
Thus sometimes accidents may also result in changes in certain characte rs of the a population. 
Characters as we know are governed by genes. Thus there is change in the frequency of genes 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 135 - 
 in small populations. This is known as “Genetic drift’, which provides diversity in the 
population.  
 
Situation -3: 
In this case beetles popul ation is increasing, but suddenly bushes were affected by a plant 
disease in which leaf material were destroyed or in which leaves are affected by this beetles got 
less food material. So beetles are poorly nourished. So the weight of beetles decrease but n o 
changes take place in their genetic material (DNA) . After a few years the plant disease are 
eliminated. Bushes are healthy with plenty of leaves.  
 
 
ACQUIRED AND INHERITED CHARACTERS AND EVOLUTION  
The germ cells of sexually reproducing population are for med in specialised reproductive 
tissue. If the weight of the beetles is reduced because of starvation, that will not change the 
DNA of the germ cells. Therefore, low weight is not a trait that can be inherited by progeny of 
a starving beetle. Therefore eve n if some generations of beetles lose their weight because of 
starvation, that is not an example of evolution, since the change is not inherited over 
generations. Change in non reproductive tissues cannot be passed on to the DNA of the germ 
cells. Therefor e the experiences of an individual during its lifetime cannot be passed on to its 
progeny, and cannot direct evolution.  
 
DARWIN’S THEORY OF EVOLUTION:  
Charles Darwin wrote his famous book ‘Origin of Species’. He threw new insights on 
evolution of species. Some salient points of Darwin’s theory are as follows:  
 
Organisms have unlimited capacity to reproduce:  
Organisms can reproduce offspring at a fast pace. This is necessary for survival, because a 
higher number of offspring ensures that at least some of the m could survive. Each organism 
has to struggle for its day to day survival. For example; a frog lays thousands of eggs at one go. 
The spawn is released in water and it is left to fend for itself. Most of the eggs are either 
washed away or are eaten by pred ators. However, some portion of eggs from the spawn 
develops into tadpoles. Once again, many tadpoles are eaten up by predators; leaving a few 
which develop into adults. It is evident, that a large number of eggs is needed to ensure that at 
least some of t hem develop into adults.  
 
Natural Selection:  
Different individuals of a particular species have different traits. Those with more suitable 
traits are selected by the nature. Each organism needs a particular trait for finding food and 
finding a mate. Those with better traits are finally able to pass on their traits to the next 
generation.  
 
Survival of the Fittest:  
Those organisms which are the fittest are able to survive, while others perish. That is how 
many species become extinct and some species continue to evolve over a period of time.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 136 - 
  
MOLECULAR ORIGIN OF LIFE:  
Stanley L. Miller and Harold C. Urey, conducted the Miller -Urey experiment in 1953 to 
demonstrate how the life would have originated on the earth. They created an environment in 
laboratory which m imicked the environment of earth as it was during the time of origin of life. 
Water, methane, ammonia and hydrogen were used in that experiment. The liquid was heated 
to initiate evaporation and electrodes were used to create electric discharge. At the end  of two 
weeks, some organic molecules were formed in the setup. Some amino acids and sugar were 
also formed. This proved the hypothesis of J. B. S. Haldane that life originated from inorganic 
raw materials.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 150  
 
Q1. What are the different ways in which individuals with a particular trait may increase 
in a population?  
Ans:  
There are different ways in which an individual with a particular trait may increase in a 
population  
When a colour variation arise during reproduction, it can pa ss the colour on to its progeny 
which may protect them from prey.  
Accidents in small population can change the frequency of some genes in a population 
even if they give no survival advantage.  
Poor nourishment may reduce the population of individuals but wh en nourishment 
conditions improve the population starts increasing again.  
Thus, the maturation, adaptation to environment and natural selection may increase a particular 
trait in a population.  
 
Q2. Why are traits acquired during the life -time of an individ ual not inherited?  
Ans:  
Traits acquired during the life -time of an individual just enable an individual to adapt itself to 
the surrounding and do not change the genetic make up of the organism. Only those variations 
are inherited, which come into the germ cell of the organism.  
 
Q3. Why are the small numbers of surviving tigers a cause of worry from the point of 
view of genetics?  
Ans:  
Small numbers of surviving tigers are a cause of worry from the point of genetics because their 
loss would cause a loss of ge ne pool, i.e., many genes will be eliminated from a gene pool.  
 
SPECIATION  
 
The process of origin of a new species is called speciation. A species is a group of organisms in 
which most of the characters are similar and members of a species are able to bree d among 
themselves. Speciation can happen if two groups of the same species are somehow prevented 
from interbreeding for several generations. This can happen because of geographical 
segregation or because of some genetic changes. Evolution of new species, because of 
geographical segregation is called genetic drift.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 151  
 
Q1. What factors could lead to the rise of a new species?  
Ans:  
Genetic drift and natural selection could lead to rise of a new species.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 137 - 
  
Q2. Will geographical isol ation be a major factor in the speciation of a selfpollinating 
plant species? Why or why not?  
Ans:  
No, geographical isolation is not a major factor in the formation of new species of self -
pollinated plants. This is because self -pollinated plants receive po llen grains from the same 
flower or another flower on the same plant and its distance from other plants hardly affects its 
reproduction. Moreover, self -pollinated plants rarely, show variations in characters.  
 
Q3. Will geographical isolation be a major fac tor in the speciation of an organism that 
reproduces asexually? Why or why not?  
Ans:  
No, because asexual reproduction involves only a single parent. So, the geographical isolation 
do not affect its reproduction cycle. Moreover, asexually reproducing organi sms rarely show 
any variations in characters.  
 
EVOLUTION AND CLASSIFICATION  
The modern system of classification is based on evolutionary relationship. Due to this, this is 
also known as phylogenetic classification. The kingdom is the highest taxa, while th e species is 
the lowest taxa. Members of a species have a higher number of common characters, than 
members of a kingdom. For example; all human beings belong to the species Homo sapiens. 
Human beings can interbreed; irrespective of their race or skin colou r. All human beings come 
under the class mammalia; as do the monkeys, elephants and cows. Apparently, each species of 
the class mammalian is quite different yet they have certain common characters; like hairs on 
the body and mammary glands in females. Simi larly, all animals are eukaryotes and cell wall is 
absent in their cells. The degree of similarity or dissimilarity shows that all animals have 
evolved from a common ancestor.  
 
HOMOLOGOUS ORGANS  
Organs which have common design but serve different functions  in different animals are called 
homologous organs. For example; the forelimbs of all tetrapods are composed of humerus, 
radio -ulna, tarsals and metatarsals. Yet, the forelimbs of frogs are adapted to a jumping 
movement, those of birds are used for flying and those of humans are used for handling tools. 
This shows that frogs, birds and humans have evolved from a common ancestor.  
 
ANALOGOUS ORGANS  
Organs which have different design but serve a common function in different animals are 
called analogous organs . Wings of birds and wings of bat are good examples of a pair of 
analogous organs. Wings of birds are composed of all the bones of forelimb and are covered 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 138 - 
 with feathers. Wings of bats are mainly composed of the digital bones and a thin membrane 
covering t he structure. Yet wings in both the organisms are used for flying.  
 
FOSSILS  
The preserved remains of animals or plants or other organisms from the distant past are called 
fossils. Fossils provide the evidence that the present animal have originated from p reviously 
existing ones through the process of continuous evolution. Fossils can be used to reconstruct 
evolutionary history of an organism. The distribution pattern of fossils shows that the ancient 
fossils present in the bottom rocks are simple, while th e most recent fossils found in the upper 
strata are more highly evolved. It means fossils form and become more and more complex as 
we proceed from earliest to recent rocks. It gives us an idea of time in history when different 
species were formed or became  extinct. Fossil also helps to trace the evolutionary history of 
some animals. Fossils also indicate connecting link between the two groups of organisms. For 
example, Archaeopteryx is a connecting link between reptiles and birds.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  156 
 
Q1. Give an example of characteristics being used to determine how close two species are 
in evolutionary terms.  
Ans:  
Homologous organs, analogous organs, vestigial organs, etc.  
 
Q2. Can the wing of a butterfly and the wing of a bat be considered homo logous organs? 
Why or why not?  
Ans:  
Butterfly belongs to phylum –Arthropoda which have chitinous exoskeleton. The bat belongs to 
class –Mammalia which have wings of skin. Thus, both butterfly and bat are not homologous 
but analogous in wing structure, i.e., have similar functions not similar structure.  
 
Q3. What are fossils? What do they tell us about the process of evolution?  
Ans:  
The preserved remains of animals or plants or other organisms from the distant past are called 
fossils.  
Fossils provide the evid ence that the present animal have originated from previously 
existing ones through the process of continuous evolution.  
Fossils can be used to reconstruct evolutionary history of an organism. The distribution 
pattern of fossils shows that the ancient fossi ls present in the bottom rocks are simple, 
while the most recent fossils found in the upper strata are more highly evolved. It means 
fossils form and become more and more complex as we proceed from earliest to recent 
rocks.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 139 - 
 It gives us an idea of time in h istory when different species were formed or became extinct.  
Fossil also help to trace the evolutionary history of some animals.  
Fossils also indicate connecting link between the two groups of organisms.  
For example, Archaeopteryx is a connecting link betw een reptiles and birds.  
 
EVOLUTION BY STAGES  
 
Evolution of complex organs and thus of complex organisms has happened in stages. Let us 
take the example of evolution of eyes. Planaria is the first animal which shows ‘eye’ like 
structure. The dark spots on p lanaria are light sensitive spots but a planaria cannot distinguish 
between two different objects. Eyes of insects are compound eyes which are made up of 
thousands of optical surfaces. Eyes of higher animals are simple eyes which are composed of a 
single l ens. Most of the animals cannot differentiate among colours. Depth perception is also 
weak in many animals. Human eyes are the most advanced; because humans can recognize 
colours and have very good depth perception.  
 
Most of the tetrapods have to use all t he four limbs for locomotion. Some apes can walk up to 
smaller distances by using just the hind limbs. Humans have finally evolved the bipedal 
walking.  
 
 
EVOLUTION TREE  
 
To understand evolution, a branching diagram or “Tree” is used to show the inferred e volution, 
relationships, among various biological species or other entities based upon similarities and 
differences in their physical and genetical characters. (see the below figure).  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 140 - 
 
 
 
EVOLUTION vs PROGRESS  
Evolution does not mean progress in every case.  This can be proved by example of bacteria. 
Bacteria are the simplest and one of the oldest organisms on the earth. Their simple body 
design does not make them weak from any angle. Bacteria are known to survive some of the 
harshest climates; like craters o f volcanoes and sulfur springs. Many animals have certain 
features which hamper even their routine activities. For example; the branch -like horns of 
antelope are a handicap for them. When an antelope runs for its life; there are times when its 
horns get en tangled in branches or bushes. This results in the death of the antelope. Colourful 
feathers of a male peacock are very good when it comes to attract a female. But because of its 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 141 - 
 conspicuous feathers, it can be easily spotted by a predator. Because of its bulky feather it 
cannot fly away to safety.  
 
HUMAN EVOLUTION  
The modern humans are called Homo sapiens. Many scientific investigations have shown that 
the modern humans evolved in Africa. They migrated towards north; in due course of time and 
settled near what is known as the Mediterranean Sea. When the ice age ended, melting of ice 
resulted in the in water level. The humans migrated in different directions from that area. One 
branch went to the western Asia, then to the Indian Peninsula and finally to Aust ralia. From the 
Indian Peninsula, branch migrated towards China and subsequently to the North America. 
From North America, the humans migrated to the South America. From the Mediterranean 
Sea, the second branch migrated towards Europe; where they are belie ved to replace the 
Neanderthals.  
 
Human evolution is the evolutionary process leading up to the appearance of a modern 
human being. We the present human beings are also have an evolutionary history like 
plant and other animals. Early man like forms appeare d about 7 lakhs 50 thousand years 
ago. The first sure fossil of our own species of man the Homosapiens, indicate that true 
man appeared on the earth 2 lakhs 50 thousand years ago.  
 
Evolution of man through ages:  
Homo habilus lived between 1.6 - 2.5 million  years ago.  
Homo erectus lived between 1 - 1.8 million years ago.  
Homo sapiens neanderthalensis lived between 2,30,000 - 3,00,000 thousands years ago.  
Homo sapiens (present man) appeared about 40 thousand years ago.  
 
There is a great diversity in human fo rms and features across the planet. So that for a 
long time, people used to talk about human ‘races’. Skin colour used to be the 
commonest way of identifying the so called races. Some were called black, some white 
or brown. Over recent years, the evidence has become very clear. There is no biological 
basis to the notion of human races. All humans are a single species with a common 
ancestor.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 158  
 
Q1. Why are human beings who look so different from each other in terms of size, colou r 
and looks said to belong to the same species?  
Ans:  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 142 - 
 All human beings, even though they have different size, colour and looks, belong to the same 
species because they have similar DNA sequences and have descended from same ancestors. 
Also, they are capable  of reproducing among themselves. These variations may have arisen due 
to environmental factors, mutation and mixing of characters during reproduction.  
 
Q2. In evolutionary terms, can we say which among bacteria, spiders, fish and 
chimpanzees have a ‘bette r’ body design? Why or why not?  
Ans:  
Evolution is the generation of diversity due to environmental selection. More and more body 
designs have emerged over time. Among bacteria, spiders, fish and chimpanzees, we can say 
that the chimpanzees have a better bo dy design because of a more complex body design. 
Various organisms evolve in their own separate ways to give rise to the current forms and have 
a basic difference in their body design because of specialization of all types and tissues. The 
chimpanzees are best adapted to survive the present day conditions and have proper division of 
labour in their body, i.e., they have different organs for performing different vital functions 
inside the body.  
For example, respiratory, excretory, circulatory and nervous sys tem, etc.  
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 159  
 
Q1. A Mendelian experiment consisted of breeding tall pea plants bearing violet flowers 
with short pea plants bearing white flowers. The progeny all bore violet flowers, but 
almost half of them were short. This suggests that the genetic make -up of the tall parent 
can be depicted as  
(a) TTWW  
(b) TTww  
(c) TtWW  
(d) TtWw  
Ans: (c) TtWW.  
Parent with genotype TtWW produce two types of gametes TW and tW, while the other with 
genotype ttww produce only one type of gamete ‘tw’ 
 
Q2. An example of homologous organs is  
(a) our arm and a dog’s fore -leg. 
(b) our teeth and an elephant’s tusks.  
(c) potato and runners of grass.  
(d) all of the above.  
Ans:  (a) 
Our arms and a dog’s fore -leg is the example of homologous organs.  
 
Q3. In evolutionary terms, we have more in common with  
(a) a Chinese school -boy. 
(b) a chimpanzee.  
(c) a spider.  
(d) a bacterium.  
Ans: (a) 
A chinese school -boy because both have almost similar DNA.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 143 - 
 Q4. A study found that children with light -coloured eyes are l ikely to have parents with 
light -coloured eyes. On this basis, can we say anything about whether the light eye colour 
trait is dominant or recessive? Why or why not?  
Ans:  
From this study, we cannot make any inference whether light eye colour trait is reces sive or 
dominant, because as both the parents have light colour eye, all the children will definitely 
have light colour eye (though certain variations may occur.)  
 
Q5. How are the areas of study – evolution and classification – interlinked?  
Ans:  
The study of classification of various organisms give us idea about the evolutionary history of 
an organisms. Organism which have certain similar characteristics are placed in one group. It 
can be thus concluded that the organisms placed in one group may have evolve d from common 
ancestors and may have common evolutionary history.  
 
Q6. Explain the terms analogous and homologous organs with examples.  
Ans:  
Homologous organs have the same basic structure and origin but perform different functions. 
For example, the foreli mb of a frog, a bird and a man have the same basic design of bones, but 
they perform different functions (frog use them to jump, birds use them to fly and man use 
them to grasp).  
 
Analogous organs have different basic structure and origin but have similar  appearance and 
perform similar functions, e.g., wings of insects and wings of birds have different basic 
structure as the wings of insect is a fold of membrane and wings of a bird are modified 
forelimbs.  
 
 
Q7. Outline a project which aims to find the dom inant coat colour in dogs.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 144 - 
 Ans:  
Coat colour ‘T’ is a dominant factor and white colour ‘t’ is recessive.  
 
Q8. Explain the importance of fossils in deciding evolutionary relationships.  
Ans:  
The preserved remains of animals or plants or other organisms from the distant past are called 
fossils.  
Fossils provide the evidence that the present animal have originated from previously 
existing ones through the process of continuous evolution.  
Fossils can be used to reconstruct evolutionary history of an organism. Th e distribution 
pattern of fossils shows that the ancient fossils present in the bottom rocks are simple, 
while the most recent fossils found in the upper strata are more highly evolved. It means 
fossils form and become more and more complex as we proceed f rom earliest to recent 
rocks.  
It gives us an idea of time in history when different species were formed or became extinct.  
Fossil also help to trace the evolutionary history of some animals.  
Fossils also indicate connecting link between the two groups of o rganisms.  
For example, Archaeopteryx is a connecting link between reptiles and birds.  
 
Q9. What evidence do we have for the origin of life from inanimate matter?  
Ans:  
Life must have developed from the simple inorganic molecules which were present on Earth 
soon after it was formed. Conditions on Earth could have given rise to more complex organic 
molecules that were necessary for life. The first primitive organism would have arisen from 
further chemical synthesis. The organic molecules were assembled in an a tmosphere similar to 
that thought to exist on early Earth over water. This was maintained at a temperature just below 
100°C and sparks were passed through the mixture of gases to stimulate lightning. At the end, 
carbon was converted to simple compounds of carbon including amino acids which make up 
protien molecules. This experiment set up demonstrates that life originated from inorganic 
molecules.  
 
Q10. Explain how sexual reproduction gives rise to more viable variations than asexual 
reproduction. How does this affect the evolution of those organisms that reproduce 
sexually?  
Ans:  
Sexual reproduction involves fusion of gametes. The offsprings show variations from their 
parents due to crossing over and exchange of gene segments. They are not carbon copies of 
their parents, due to recombination of parental genes and produce better offsprings. Also, due 
to environmental factors certain favourable variations are also produced. Due to production of 
variations, sexually reproducing animals show very quick evolution.  
Whereas in asexual reproduction, organisms raised are the exact copies of parents. They rarely 
show any variation.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 145 - 
 Q11. How is the equal genetic contribution of male and female parents ensured in the 
progeny?  
Ans:  
The male and female reproductive cells di vide by meiosis to form haploid gametes. These 
gametes have equal genetic material. The zygote is formed by the fusion of male and female 
gamete, i.e., it has equal genetic contribution from male and female parents. The individual is 
developed from the zyg ote these after.  
 
Q12. Only variations that confer an advantage to an individual organism will survive in a 
population. Do you agree with this statement? Why or why not?  
Ans:  
All the variations in a species do not have equal chances of surviving in the env ironment. 
Depending on the nature of variations different individuals would have different kinds of 
advantages. Selection of variants by environmental factors forms the basis of evolutionary 
process. The variations which confer disadvantages to an individu al organism will not survive 
because the environmental factor cannot support this.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 158 - 
 CHAPTER – 15 
 
OUR ENVIRONMENT  
 
Environment:  Our surrounding is called environment.  
 
Living organisms live in different surroundings. Some plants and animals completely live in 
water and some others live on land.  
Man also leads life in different surroundings. Some live in cities, some in towns and some in 
villages.  
Plants, animals, human beings survive with the interaction between them and the non -living 
things like air, water and land.  
Human beings depend on the resources of nature. These resources include soil, water, coal, 
electrici ty, oil, gas, etc. These resources improve the life style of human beings.  
 
Environmental science can be defined as the study of organisms in relation to their 
surrounding.  
 
Human activities related to livelihood and welfare generate waste. All wastes are pollutants 
and they create pollution in one way or another. Air, land and water surroundings are affected 
due to improper disposal of wastes which create an imbalance in the environment.  
 
Pollution: Any undesirable change in the physical, chemical or biolo gical characteristics of 
air, land and water that affect human life adversely is called pollution.  
 
Pollutant: A substance released into the environment due to natural or human activity which 
affects adversely the environment is called pollutant. e.g. Sulp hur-di-oxide, carbon -monoxide, 
lead, mercury, etc.  
 
CLASSIFICATION OF WASTES  
1. Bio –degradable wastes  
2. Non –bio-degradable wastes  
 
Substances that are broken down by biological process of biological or microbial action are 
called bio -degradable waste. e.g . wood, paper and leather.  
Substances that are not broken down by biological or microbial action are called non -bio-
degradable wastes. e.g. Plastic substances and mineral wastes.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 257  
 
Q1. Why are some substances biodegradable and  some non -biodegradable?  
Ans:  
Some substances such as metal, glass, plastic, etc. which cannot be decomposed by the living 
organisms are non -biodegradable wastes. These substances are non -biodegradable because the 
micro -organisms do not have enzymes that c an digest these substances. Therefore, we classify 
them as non -biodegradable wastes. Other substances such as paper, vegetable wastes, etc. that 
can be easily broken down by enzymes are biodegradable wastes.  
 
Q2. Give any two ways in which biodegradable su bstances would affect the environment.  
Ans:  
(i) Biodegradable substances act as a medium to return back the nutrients to the environment.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 159 - 
 (ii) Their degradation may release certain gases in the atmosphere thereby polluting the 
environment.  
 
Q3. Give any tw o ways in which non -biodegradable substances would affect the 
environment.  
Ans:  
(i) They make the environment poisonous and unfit for survival.  
(ii) They block the transfer of energy and minerals in the ecosystem.  
 
ECO -SYSTEM — WHAT ARE ITS COMPONENTS?  
 
A community of organisms that interact with one another and with the environment is called an 
ecosystem.  
An ecosystem has two types of components, viz. biotic component and abiotic component.  
Producers, consumers and decomposers are biotic factors.  
 
ABIOTIC  COMPONENT  
All the non -living things make the abiotic component of an ecosystem. Air, water and soil are 
the abiotic components.  
Air provides oxygen (for respiration), carbon dioxide (for photosynthesis) and other gases 
for various needs of the living bein gs. 
Water is essential for all living beings because all the metabolic activities happen in the 
presence of water.  
Soil is the reservoir of various nutrients which are utilised by plants. Through plants, these 
nutrients reach other living beings.  
 
BIOTIC C OMPONENT  
All living beings make the biotic component of an ecosystem.  
Green plants play the role of producers; because they prepare the food by photosynthesis.  
Animals and other living beings play the role of consumers; because they take food 
(directly or indirectly) from plants.  
Bacteria and fungi play the role of decomposers; as they decompose dead remains of plants 
and animals so that raw materials of organisms can be channelized back to the 
environment.  
 
 
Fig. Flow of energy in an ecosystem  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 160 - 
 BALANCE IN  ECO -SYSTEM  
A balanced ecosystem is an ecological community together with its environment and 
functioning as a complex unit. An ecosystem is maintained by the balance in nature such as the 
balance between hawks and mice, if hawk population is larger than t he mice population, then it 
is not balanced. They are balanced between resources like a banana tree and monkeys. If the 
banana trees stop growing, the monkeys won’t get bananas.  
 
An ecosystem maintains the balance between the number of resources and the nu mber of users 
or the balance between prey and predators.  
 
FOOD CHAIN AND FOOD WEB  
The ultimate source of this energy is the sun. Producers like green plants trap solar energy and 
convert it into the chemical energy of food. When a primary consumer eats the  producer, a part 
of this energy is passed on to it.  
 
The primary consumer is then eaten by a secondary consumer. And the secondary consumer 
may be eaten by a tertiary consumer, and so on. In this way energy gets transferred from one 
consumer to the next higher level of consumer. A series of organisms through which food 
energy flows in an ecosystem is called a food chain. It may also be defined as follows.  
 
“A food chain in an ecosystem is a series of organisms in which each organism feeds on the 
one below  it in the series.”  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 161 - 
 In a forest ecosystem, grass is eaten by a deer, which in turn is eaten by a tiger. The grass, deer 
and tiger form a food chain. In this food chain, energy flows from the grass (producer) to the 
deer (primary consumer) to the tiger (se condary consumer) [see figure (a)].  
 
A food chain in a grassland ecosystem may consist of grasses and other plants, grasshoppers, 
frogs, snakes and hawks [see figure (b)].  
 
In a freshwater aquatic ecosystem like a pond, the organisms in the food chain incl ude algae, 
small animals, insects and their larvae, small fish, big fish and a fish -eating bird or animal [see 
figure (c)].  
 
A food chain always begins with producers. Herbivores (plant -eaters) come next in the chain. 
They are consumed by carnivores (flesh -eaters). A few food chains can be long and may 
extend to the fourth, fifth or even sixth order of consumers.  
Some common food chains are mentioned below:  
Plants → Deer → Lion  
Plants → Worm→ Bird → Cat  
Plants → Grasshopper→ Frog→ Snake→ Hawk  
Algae → Small→ a nimal → Small fish → Big fish —> Bird  
 
FOOD WEB  
 
A food web is a graphical depiction of feeding connections among species of an ecological 
community. Food web consists of food chains of a particular ecosystem.   The food web is a 
illustration of various met hods of feeding that links the ecosystem. The food web also defines 
the energy flow through species of a community as a result of their feeding relationships. All 
the food chains are interconnected and overlapping within an ecosystem and they make up a 
food web. It increases the stability of ecosystem. It provides other source of food and allows 
the endangered species to grow.  
 
TROPHIC LEVELS OF FOOD CHAINS  
The levels of a food chain (food pyramid) is called Trophic levels . The trophic level of an 
organism is the level it holds in a food pyramid.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 162 - 
 The sun  is the source of all the energy in food chains. Green plants, usually the first level of 
any food chain, absorb some of the Sun’s light energy to make their own food by 
photosynthesis. Green plants (autotr ophs) are therefore known as ‘ Producers ’ in a food 
chain.  
 
The second level of the food chains is called the Primary Consumer . These consume the 
green plants. Animals in this group are usually herbivores. Examples include insects, 
sheep, caterpillars and e ven cows.  
 
The third in the chain are Secondary Consumers.  These usually eat up the primary 
consumers and other animal matter. They are commonly called carnivores and examples 
include lions, snakes and cats.  
 
The fourth level is called Tertiary Consumers.  These are animals that eat secondary 
consumers.  
 
Quaternary Consumers  eat tertiary consumers.  
 
At the top of the levels are Predators . They are animals that have little or no natural 
enemies. They are the ‘bosses’ of their ecosystems. Predators feed on pr eys. A prey is an 
animal that predators hunt to kill and feed on. Predators include owls, snakes, wild cats, 
crocodiles and sharks. Humans can also be called predators.  
 
When any organism dies, detrivores  (like vultures, worms and crabs) eat them up. The r est 
are broken down by decomposers (mostly bacteria and fungi), and the exchange of energy 
continues. Decomposers start the cycle again.  
 
ENERGY FLOW IS UNIDIRECTIONAL AND REQUIRES CONTINUOUS INPUTS.  
 
Ecosystem energy processes conform to the thermodynamic  laws.  
 
Energy cannot be made or destroyed  
Energy transformations are not perfect and energy is lost in each transformation in the 
form of heat.  
 
The flow of energy in the ecosystem is unidirectional. The energy enters the plants (from the 
sun) through pho tosynthesis during the making of food. This energy is then passed on from one 
organism to another in a food chain.  
 
Energy given out by the organisms as heat is lost to the environment, it does not return to be 
used by the plants again. This makes the flow  of energy in ecosystem 'unidirectional'. Thus, the 
flow of energy in the ecosystem is said to be unidirectional because the energy lost as heat 
from the living organisms of a food chain cannot be reused by plants in photosynthesis.  
 
During the transfer of  energy through successive trophic levels in an ecosystem, there is a loss 
of energy all along the path. No transfer of energy is 100 per cent. The energy available at each 
successive trophic level is 10 per cent of the previous level. Thus, there is a pro gressive decline 
(gradual reduction) in the amount of energy available as we go from producer level to the 
higher trophic levels of organisms.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 163 - 
 
 
 
The nutrient movement is a cyclic movement where the nutrients revolve round with an 
ecosystem, hence cyclic . Nutrients pass from abiotic nutrient stores, such as the soil and the 
atmosphere, into biotic, plant and animal stores (the biomass). The nutrients are then recycled, 
within the ecosystem, following death and decomposition.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 164 - 
 
 
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO . 261  
 
Q1. What are trophic levels? Give an example of a food chain and state the different 
trophic levels in it.  
Ans:  
Each stage of a food chain is known as tropic level.  
 
 
Q2. What is the role of decomposers in the ecosystem?  
Ans:  
Decomposers include mi cro-organisms such as bacteria and fungi that obtain nutrients by 
breaking down the remains of dead plants and animals. They help in the breakdown of organic 
matter or biomass from the body of dead plants and animals into simple inorganic raw 
materials, su ch as CO 2, H 2O, and some nutrients.  
 
OZONE LAYER DEPLETION  
 
Ozone (O 3) is a molecule formed by three atoms of oxygen. While O 2, which we normally 
refer to as oxygen, is essential for all aerobic forms of life. Ozone, is a deadly poison. 
However, at the hig her levels of the atmosphere, ozone performs an essential function. It 
shields the surface of the earth from ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the Sun. This radiation is 
highly damaging to organisms, for example, it is known to cause skin cancer in human bei ngs. 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 165 - 
 Ozone at the higher levels of the atmosphere is a product of UV radiation acting on oxygen 
(O2) molecule. The higher energy UV radiations split apart some moleculer oxygen (O 2) into 
free oxygen (O) atoms. These atoms then combine with the molecular ox ygen to form ozone as 
shown — 
 
 
The amount of ozone in the atmosphere began to drop sharply in the 1980s. This decrease has 
been linked to synthetic chemicals like chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) which are used as 
refrigerants and in fire extinguishers. In 1987 , the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP) succeeded in forging an agreement to freeze CFC production at 1986 levels.  
 
HOW TO PROTECT US FROM THESE HAZARDOUS WASTES ?  
The following methods are adopted for the disposal of harmful waste materials.  
1. Land Fills  
There are permanent storage facilities in secured lands for military related liquid and 
radioactive waste materials. High level radioactive wastes are stored in deep underground 
storage.  
 
2. Deep well injection  
It involves drilling a well into d ry porous material below ground water. Hazardous waste 
liquids are pumped into the well. They are soaked into the porous material and made to remain 
isolated indefinitely.  
 
3. Incineration  
The burning of materials is called incineration. Hazardous bio -medi cal wastes are usually 
disposed off by means of incineration. Human anatomical wastes, discarded medicines, toxic 
drugs, blood, pus, animal wastes, microbiological and bio -technological wastes etc., are called 
bio-medical wastes.  
 
MANAGEMENT OF NON -HAZARDO US WASTES – SOLID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT  
 
Reuse and recycling technique  
The separating out of materials such as rubber, glass, paper and scrap metal from refuse and 
reprocessing them for reuse is named as reclamation of waste or recycling.  
 
Paper  
(54% recovery) Can be repulped and reprocessed into recycled paper, cardboard and other 
products.  
 
Glass  
(20% recovery) Can be crushed, remelted and made into new containers or crushes used as a 
substitute for gravel or sand in construction materials such as concrete and  asphalt, Food waste 
and yard wastes (leaves, grass etc.,) can be composted to produce humus soil conditioner.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 264  
 
Q1. What is ozone and how does it affect any ecosystem?  
Ans:  
Ozone is chemically O 3 molecule. Ozone layer is pres ent in the stratosphere layer of 
atmosphere. It absorbs most of ultraviolet radiations coming from the Sun.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 166 - 
 Ozone gas is poisonous in nature, if inhaled.  
 
Q2. How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give any two methods.  
Ans:  
(i) Using biodegradable materials  
(ii) Using recyclable materials.  
 
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 159  
 
Q1. Which of the following groups contain only biodegradable items?  
(a) Grass, flowers and leather  
(b) Grass, wood and plastic  
(c) Fruit -peels, cake and lime -juice  
(d) Cake, wood and grass  
Ans:  
(c)Fruit -peels, cake, and lime -juice 
(d)Cake, wood, and grass  
Substances that are broken down by the biological processes are said to be biodegradable, e.g., 
fruit, cake, lime -juice, wood, grass, etc.  
 
Q2. Which of the follo wing constitute a food -chain?  
(a) Grass, wheat and mango  
(b) Grass, goat and human  
(c) Goat, cow and elephant  
(d) Grass, fish and goat  
Ans:  
(b) Grass, goat and human  
Each step of food chain form a trophic level. Producers (grass) form the first trophic lev el, 
herbivore (goat) the second and carnivore (human) the third trophic level.  
 
Q3. Which of the following are environment -friendly practices?  
(a) Carrying cloth -bags to put purchases in while shopping  
(b) Switching off unnecessary lights and fans  
(c) Walk ing to school instead of getting your mother to drop you on her scooter  
(d) All of the above  
Ans:  
(d) All of the above  
Cloth -bags are biodegradable, switching off unnecessary light and fans and limited use of 
petrol/diesel cause less pollution hence, envir onment friendly practices.  
 
Q4. What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level?  
Ans:  
If we kill all the organisms in one trophic level, the lower trophic level will grow more in 
number and the higher trophic level will not survive and f low of energy from one trophic level 
to other will not take place.  
 
Q5. Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be different for 
different trophic levels? Can the organisms of any trophic level be removed without 
causing any damage  to the ecosystem?  
Ans:  
The impact of removing all the organism in a trophic level will be different for different 
trophic levels. The lower trophic level of an ecosystem has a greater number of individuals 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 167 - 
 than the higher trophic levels. If the organisms of any trophic level are removed they cause a 
damage to the ecosystem. Removal of producers will affect all the organisms and they won’t 
survive. The removal of higher trophic level will lead to increase in organisms of lower trophic 
level and the organism s die due to shortage of food.  
 
Q6. What is biological magnification? Will the levels of this magnification be different at 
different levels of the ecosystem?  
Ans:  
The accumulation of chemicals in the individuals of higher trophic level is called biologica l 
magnification.  
No, the levels of magnification is not same in all trophic levels. The chemicals are not 
degraded and get accumulate progressively at each trophic level which lead to 
biomagnification. Biomagnification is more in organisms of higher trophi c levels.  
 
Q7. What are the problems caused by the non -biodegradable wastes that we generate?  
Ans:  
Non-biodegradable substances affect the environment in the following ways:  
(i) Since the non -biodegradable substances cannot be broken down, they get accumul ated and 
thus contaminate the soil and the water resources.  
(ii) These substances, when accidentally eaten by some stray animal, can harm them and can 
even cause their death.  
(iii) These substances occupy more space in the landfills and require special dis posal 
techniques.  
(iv) These materials can accumulate in the environment and can also enter the food chain.  
 
Q8. If all the waste we generate is biodegradable, will this have no impact on the 
environment?  
Ans:  
If all the waste is biodegradable, then there will be no accumulation of waste and the Earth 
would be a cleaner place to live. But if this biodegradable waste is too large in amount then its 
degradation may lead to air pollution (due to release of gases).  
 
Q9. Why is damage to the ozone layer a cause for concern? What steps are being taken to 
limit this damage?  
Ans:  
The thinning of ozone layer present in stratosphere is called depletion of ozone layer. Due to 
depletion of ozone layer, harmful ultraviolet radiations will reach the surface of Earth which  
may lead to skin diseases and cancer.  
To reduce the depletion of ozone layer, the use of chlorofluorocarbons has been minimised.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 180 - 
 CHAPTER – 16 
 
MANAGEMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES  
 
Natural resources can be broadly categorized into two type s, viz. exhaustible and non -
exhaustible. Management of natural resources is all about their judicious use in a way that the 
exhaustible resources can last for many generations to come and non -exhaustible resources can 
be maintained in as pristine form as p ossible.  
 
CONSEQUENCES OF EXPLOITATION OF NATURAL RESOURCES  
 
There are many consequences of exploitation of natural resources. Some examples are given 
below:  
Burning of fossil fuels creates air pollution. Excess amount of carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere l eads to global warming. Some polluting gases; like oxides of nitrogen and 
sulphur lead to acid rain, which is harmful for living beings. Acid rain is also harmful for 
monuments and buildings.  
Excess exploitation of groundwater leads to a drastic fall in wa ter table. This is the reason 
many places are experiencing acute shortage of drinking water.  
Overuse of fertilisers and insecticides leads to soil pollution and soil erosion.  
Many pollutants are directly flown into water bodies. This has resulted in water  pollution in 
many rivers, lakes and even in oceans.  
 
COLIFORM BACTERIA  
Coliform bacteria originate as organisms in soil or vegetation and in the intestinal tract of 
warm -blooded animals (fecal coli). This group of bacteria has long been an indicator of wa ter 
contamination and possible presence of intestinal parasites and pathogens. Coliform bacteria 
are relatively simple to identify, are present in much larger numbers than more dangerous 
pathogens, and react to the natural environment and treatment process es similarly to pathogens. 
By observing coliform bacteria, the increase or decrease of many pathogenic bacteria can be 
estimated.  
 
Where are these bacteria found?  
Sources of bacterial pollution include runoff from woodlands, pastures, and feedlots; septic  
tanks and sewage plants; and animals and wild fowl. Domestic animals contribute heavily to 
the bacterial population. Many coliform bacteria may be directly deposited into natural streams 
from waste in water and runoff from areas with high concentrations o f animals or humans.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 181 - 
 How could coliform bacteria enter a water system?  
 
The most likely sources come from where the water is used —the spigot, sink, or unclean 
containers. Another is backflow from a contaminated source such as a sink -top carbon filter, 
bucket of water, or puddle at the end of a hose. Also, reduced pressure or suction in long water 
lines can draw in bacteria -laden water or soil into pipes through joints.  
However, the presence of bacteria is not always related to illness. The water could have  been 
contaminated through improper sampling. Children may become ill because of unsanitary 
conditions in the home. Who sampled the water and how? How sanitary are your practices in 
food handling, personal hygiene, etc.? Do the children wash regularly? The se are more likely 
routes for contamination than the water itself.  
 
POLLUTION OF THE GANGA  
 
The Ganga runs its course of over 2500 km from Gangotri in the Himalayas to Ganga Sagar in 
the Bay of Bengal. It is being turned into a drain by more than a hundred  towns and cities in 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and West Bengal that pour their garbage and excreta into it. Largely 
untreated sewage is dumped into the Ganges every day. In addition, think of the pollution 
caused by other human activities like bathing, washing of clothes and immersion of ashes or 
unburnt corpses. And then, industries contribute chemical effluents to the Ganga’s pollution 
load and the toxicity kills fish in large sections of the river.  
 
GANGA ACTION PLAN (GAP)  
 
Inertia in taking action to reduce the level of pollution stemmed largely from a widespread 
belief that the Ganga, as a holy river, had the ability to purify all that came into contact with it . 
Although there is some scientific evidence for the Ganga river’s high capacity to assimilate 
(i.e. biodegrade) a large level of organic waste input, including pathogens, but no river can 
sustain its self -purifying power with this kind of over -use, misuse and abuse of its waters.  
 
The Ganga Action Plan (GAP) originated from the personal intervention an d interest of our 
late Prime Minister Mrs Indira Gandhi who had directed the Central Board for the Prevention 
and Control of Water Pollution, now Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) to do a 
comprehensive survey of the situation in 1979. CPCB published t wo comprehensive reports 
which formed the base for GAP in Oct 1984 but was not presented to the nation formally due 
to assassination of Smt Indira Gandhi.  
 
In Feb 1985, the Central Ganga Authority (CGA) with the PM as Chairman was formed, with 
an initial b udget of Rs 350 crore to administer the cleaning of the Ganga and to restore it to 
pristine condition by our late PM Sh Rajiv Gandhi. In June 1985, the Ganga Project Directorate 
(GPD) was established as a wing of the Department of Environment. GAP was laun ched on 
June 14, 1986 by Sh Rajiv Gandhi at Varanasi.  
 
 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  
 
Development is necessary for making all around economic development. But development 
often comes with a price in the form of environmental damage. Sustainable development 
mean s following certain practices which help in saving our environment from damage. This is 
necessary for maintaining the earth in a good shape so that future generations can also enjoy 
the bounty of nature.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 182 - 
 THREE R’s (REDUCE, RECYCLE AND REUSE):  
 
Reduce:  W e  should reduce the consumption of various resources wherever possible. For 
example; we can reduce the consumption of electricity by switching off lights and other 
appliances when they are not required. While leaving the home, one should always check 
for fan s and lights and switch them off. This can not only help in saving electricity but also 
in saving the fuels which are utilised in electricity production. We should immediately 
repair a leaking tap so that precious water can be saved.  
 
Recycle:  T h e r e  a r e  m a ny items which can be recycled again and again. Recycling is 
another way of reducing the demand for natural resources. For example; by recycling 
paper, we reduce the demand for wood and thus help in saving the forest.  
 
Reuse:  Many items can be reused many times. For example; old newspaper can be used for 
packing many items. Old envelopes can be used for doing rough work while doing your 
homework. Old plastic bottles can be used for many other purposes.  
 
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 269  
 
Q1. What changes can  you make in your habits to become more environment friendly?  
Ans:  
We should try and know about how our choices affect environment. Use of renewable 
resources and biodegradable stuffs should be promoted. For example (a) Use of paper bags 
instead of plastic , (b) Use sources of energy like LPG, alcohol, etc., which do not cause 
pollution, (c) Use of substances which can be recycled or can be reused.  
 
Q2. What would be the advantages of exploiting resources with short -term aims?  
Ans:  
There should be a judiciou s use of natural resources as they are limited in nature. We should 
not exploit resources for our short term gains as this would only lead to depletion of natural 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 183 - 
 resources for the present generation as well as generations to come. Hence, we can say that 
there are hardly any advantages of exploiting natural resources for short term gains.  
 
Q3. How would these advantages differ from the advantages of using a longterm 
perspective in managing our resources?  
Ans:  
In the case of a long -time perspective in managi ng our resources, these resources will last for 
the generations to come. This management ensures uniform distribution among the people. It 
conserves the natural resources for many years and not just for a few years, as in the case of a 
short -term perspecti ve in conserving natural resources.  
 
Q4. Why do you think there should be equitable distribution of resources? What forces 
would be working against an equitable distribution of our resources?  
Ans:  
Natural resources of the Earth must be distributed among th e people uniformly so that each and 
every one gets his share of the resource.  
Human greed, corruption, and the lobby of the rich and powerful are the forces working against 
an equitable distribution of resources.  
 
FOREST AND WILDLIFE  
 
Conservation of fores ts and wildlife is necessary to protect the biodiversity. This is important 
because loss of biodiversity leads to ecological imbalance. But any conservation effort for 
forest and wildlife must keep the interests of all stakeholders in mind.  
 
STAKEHOLDERS  
The stakeholders who are directly or indirectly affected by forest are as follows:  
People living in or around forests; as they depend on various forest produce for their 
livelihood.  
The forest department which is the owner of the forest land.  
Various indust rialists who depend on forest for many raw materials. For example; the beedi 
industry needs kendu leaves as raw material. Wood is used as raw material in many 
industries.  
The wildlife and nature enthusiasts.  
 
Before the beginning of the colonial rule in In dia, forest dwellers were free to utilize the 
resources from forests as they wished. But things changed when the British rulers took over the 
control of the forests in India. They restricted the access of forest dwellers to forest resources. 
This created h uge problems for many people who had traditionally been dependent on forests 
for their survival.  
 
After the independence of India, the forest department took over but the interests of forest 
dwellers continued to be ignored for a long time. The forest was  cut to obtain timber for 
making railways and for various construction activities. The cleared forest was replaced by 
planting eucalyptus trees which led to the problem of monoculture. Growing a single species is 
called monoculture. It disturbs the biodive rsity of an area.  
 
LOCAL PEOPLE AND FOREST CONSERVATION  
There are many examples which suggest that involvement of local communities is necessary 
for any conservation effort. The Bishnoi community of Rajasthan is one such example. Amrita 
Devi Bishnoi is sti ll remembered with reverence for the way she fought for protecting the 
khejri trees in Khejrali village. She; along with 363 other people; sacrificed her life for the 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 184 - 
 protection of khejri trees in 1731. The ‘Amrita Devi Bishnoi National Award for Wildlife 
Conservation’ has been named in her honour.  
 
Another example is of the nomadic herders of the Himalayas. The nomadic herders used to 
graze their animals near the great Himalayan National Park. Every summer, the nomadic 
people brought their herds down the v alley so that the sheep could get plenty of grass to eat. 
When the National Park was made in that area, the nomadic herders were stopped from grazing 
their sheep in the protected area. Now, in the absence of grazing by the sheep, the grasses grow 
very tall  in the region. Tall grasses fall over and prevent fresh growth of grass. This shows that 
by excluding and alienating the local people from forests, proper conservation efforts cannot be 
carried out.  
 
CHIPKO MOVEMENT  
 
The Chipko Movement began in the early  1980s from a small village; Reni in Garhwal district. 
The women of the village began hugging a tree to prevent the cutting of trees by the 
contractors. The Chipko Movement later spread to other parts of India. It had been 
instrumental in stopping deforest ation to a large extent.  
 
ARABARI’S EXAMPLE OF PEOPLE’S PARTICIPATION IN FOREST 
MANAGEMENT  
 
In 1972, the forest department realized its mistake while reviving the degraded sal forests of 
Arabari forest range. Arabari forest lies in Midnapore district of We st Bengal. The earlier 
methods of policing and surveillance were a total failure as they often led to frequent clashes 
with local people. It also led to alienation of people from the conservation programme. Then 
came a forest officer; named A K Banerjee; w ho was a real visionary. He involved the local 
people in the revival of 1,272 hectares of forest. In lieu of that the villagers were given 
employment in silviculture and harvest and were given 25% of the harvest. They were also 
allowed to gather firewood a nd fodder against a nominal payment. Due to active participation 
of the local community there was remarkable revival of the Arabari sal forest. By 1983, the 
value of the forest rose to Rs. 12.5 crores.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 273  
 
Q1. Why should we cons erve forests and wildlife?  
Ans:  
We should conserve forests and wildlife to preserve the biodiversity (range of different life -
forms) so as to avoid the loss of ecological stability. A large number of tribes are the habitants 
in and around the forests. If t he forests are not conserved, then it may affect these habitants. 
Without proper management of forest and wildlife, the quality of soil, the water sources, and 
even the amount of rainfall may be affected. Without forest and wildlife, life would become 
impo ssible for human beings.  
 
Q2. Suggest some approaches towards the conservation of forests.  
Ans:  
Various approaches are required for the conservation of forests. Afforestation is one of the 
most important approach. Besides this  
a) Deforestation should be ba nned.  
b) People should be made more aware about importance of forests.  
(c) The protected areas should be managed by local people which would be quite efficient.  
(d) National parks and sanctuaries should be formed to conserve the biodiversity.  
(e) Hunting s hould be banned and laws should be formulated against hunting.  
(f) There should be proper laws for exploitation of forest resources.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 185 - 
 WATER FOR ALL  
 
Water harvesting is an age -old concept in India. Khadins, tanks and nadis in Rajasthan, 
bandharas and tals i n Maharashtra, bundhis in Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh, ahars and 
pynes in Bihar, kulhs in Himachal Pradesh, ponds in the Kandi belt of Jammu region, and eris 
(tanks) in Tamil Nadu, surangams in Kerala, and kattas in Karnataka are some of the ancient 
water harvesting, including water conveyance, structures. These are still in use at many places.  
 
The traditional water harvesting structures are location specific and have been perfected by 
people over a long period of time. They take into account the loca l geography and the need of 
the local people and hence are highly efficient.  
 
The traditional water harvesting structures usually focus on recharging the groundwater rather 
making an open reservoir. It has several advantages. Unlike surface water; the grou ndwater 
does not evaporate and thus loss because of evaporation is prevented. The groundwater does 
not provide a breeding ground for the mosquitoes and hence is good for public health as well. 
The groundwater is relatively protected from contamination by h uman activities.  
 
DAMS  
 
A dam  i s a b arri er th at impounds  water  or underground streams. Reservoirs created  by dams 
not only suppress floods but also provide water for such activities as irrigation , human 
consumption , industrial use , aquaculture , and navigability . Hydropower  is often used in 
conjunction with dams to generate electricity. A dam can also be used to collect water or for 
storage of water which can be even ly distributed between locations. Dams generally serve the 
primary purpose of retaining water, while other structures such as floodgates  o r  levees  (a l s o 
known as dikes ) are used to manage or prevent water flow into specific land regions.  
 
ADVANTAGES:   
 
Once a dam is constructed, ele ctricity can be produced at a constant rate.  
If electricity is not needed, the sluice gates can be shut, stopping electricity generation. The 
water can be saved for use another time when electricity demand is high.  
Dams are designed to last many decades a nd so can contribute to the generation of 
electricity for many years / decades.  
The lake that forms behind the dam can be used for water sports and leisure / pleasure 
activities. Often large dams become tourist attractions in their own right.  
The lake's water can be used for irrigation purposes.  
The build up of water in the lake means that energy can be stored until needed, when the 
water is released to produce electricity.  
When in use, electricity produced by dam systems do not produce green house gases . They 
do not pollute the atmosphere.  
 
DISADVANATGES:   
 
Dams are extremely expensive to build and must be built to a very high standard.  
The high cost of dam construction means that they must operate for many decades to 
become profitable.  
The flooding o f large areas of land means that the natural environment is destroyed.  
People living in villages and towns that are in the valley to be flooded, must move out. This 
means that they lose their farms and businesses. In some countries, people are forcibly 
removed so that hydro -power schemes can go ahead.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 186 - 
 The building of large dams can cause serious geological damage. For example, the building 
of the Hoover Dam in the USA triggered a number of earth quakes and has depressed the 
earth’s surface at its location.  
Although modern planning and design of dams is good, in the past old dams have been 
known to be breached (the dam gives under the weight of water in the lake). This has led to 
deaths and flooding.  
Dams built blocking the progress of a river in one country  usually means that the water 
supply from the same river in the following country is out of their control. This can lead to 
serious problems between neighbouring countries.  
Building a large dam alters the natural water table level. For example, the buildi ng of the 
Aswan Dam in Egypt has altered the level of the water table. This is slowly leading to 
damage of many of its ancient monuments as salts and destructive minerals are deposited in 
the stone work from rising damp caused by the changing water table l evel. 
 
 
WATER HARVESTING  
 
Water harvesting is the act of collecting and storing rainwater for future use. This can be done 
in areas of low or high rainfall amounts using tanks and cisterns. Collecting rainfall can reduce 
the amount of run -off, flooding, an d erosion in prone areas. This is especially relevant in urban 
areas where the land has been used to build infrastructure, and the rainwater run -off has 
nowhere which can result in flooding. In more rural areas when the water is collected, the run -
off into  rivers and ponds is reduced which in turn slows the contamination from surface 
fertilizers and pesticides. If the collected water is to be used as drinking water, it can be treate d 
and used in environments where drinking water is scarce. Another use for t he water is for non -
drinking purposes such as flushing toilets. Homeowners and farmers can reduce their water 
bills and the use of ground water by using the collected water for irrigating crops, lawns, and 
trees. This benefits the environment by conserving  the levels of ground water, which in many 
areas is precariously low.  
 
Why adopt rain water harvesting system?  
Reduces the runoff volume and the peak flow, hence mitigate floods.  
Recharges ground water thus is a solution to water shortage problem in winter s. 
Reduces the cost per litre of water since a large amount of power that is consumed while 
pumping water from subsurface aquifers can be saved.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 187 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 276  
 
Q1. Find out about the traditional systems of water harvesting/management in  your 
region.  
Ans:  
There are many traditional methods of water harvesting or management. These are khadis, 
ponds, tals, etc. Also wells have been dug for drinking water and irrigation purposes. Canals 
have been developed and water reservoirs are made by go vernment for providing proper 
drinking water.  
 
Q2. Compare the above system with the probable systems in hilly/ mountainous areas or 
plains or plateau regions.  
Ans:  
In plains, the water harvesting structures are crescent -shaped earthen embankments. These a re 
low, straight, and concrete.  
 
In hilly regions, the system of canal irrigation called Kulhs is used for water harvesting. This 
involves a collection of rain water in a stream, which is then diverted into man -made channels 
down the hill sides.  
 
Q3. Find out the source of water in your region/locality. Is water from this source 
available to all people living in that area?  
Ans:  
The source of water in our region is ground water. Water from the source is available to all the 
people living in that area.  
 
COAL AND PETROLEUM  
 
Coal and petroleum are the main energy resources for us. But since these are exhaustible in 
nature so we need to find out alternate sources of energy. Scientists are working on developing 
some alternate energy sources so that dependency on c oal and petroleum can be reduced. Some 
examples are given below:  
Solar energy is being used to produce electricity at many places. Although the technologies 
for solar energy are still costly but future prospects look bright.  
Fuel cell is another developmen t which may help in replacing the internal combustion 
engines from automobiles.  
Hydrogen is being used as fuel in buses and cars in many countries. Hydrogen; when used 
as a fuel produces water as a byproduct. Thus, hydrogen can be an environment -friendly 
fuel. 
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 278 -279 
 
Q1. What changes would you suggest in your home in order to be environment -friendly?  
Ans:  
Certain changes can be incorporated in our daily work at home, to make it more eco -friendly  
(i) We should plant different  kinds of shady plants, fruit and vegetable bearing plants, etc.  
(ii) There should be less use of insecticides and pesticides.  
(iii) Food should be properly stored to avoid its spoilage, thereby preventing the wastage of 
food.  
(iv) There should be proper d rainage system for the water to pass in the drains.  
(v) There should be proper disposal of water.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 188 - 
 (vi) Dustbins and other waste products should be properly covered and the garbage should not 
be dumped around the houses.  
(vii) Proper sanitary and hygiene me thods must be adopted.  
 
Q2. Can you suggest some changes in your school which would make it environment 
friendly?  
Ans:  
(i) To make our school environment eco -friendly, it is essential to plant different kinds of 
shady and fruity trees. Different flowering  plants should also be planted.  
(ii) No waste material and used paper, foil, empty packets should be spread all over the school.  
(iii) Water facility should be in good condition.  
(iv) Rooms should be proper ventilated.  
(v) There should be proper provision of dustbins for the disposal of waste.  
(vi) There should be big and clean play grounds.  
 
Q3. We saw in this chapter that there are four main stakeholders when it comes to forests 
and wildlife. Which among these should have the authority to decide the manag ement of 
forest produce? Why do you think so?  
Ans:  
The forest department of the government should have the authority to decide the management 
of forest produces. This is because the forest department is the care taker of the forest land and 
is responsible  for any damage to the forest.  
 
Q4. How can you as an individual contribute or make a difference to the management of 
(a) forests and wildlife, (b) water resources and (c) coal and petroleum?  
Ans:  
(a) Forest and wildlife  
(i) We should judiciously use the forest products.  
(ii) Felling of trees for paper, timer, etc., should be controlled.  
(iii) Killing of wild animals for their skin, etc., should be banned.  
(iv) Afforestation should be practised.  
(v) Management of the forest should be given to local people.  
(vi) We should try and preserve biodiversity we have inherited.  
 
(b) Water resources  
(i) Leaking taps should be repaired.  
(ii) Water from industries should not be directly dumped in the river water.  
(iii) Use of insecticides and pesticides should be minim ised, which are washed away with rain 
and contaminate river water and underground water.  
(iv) Methods like rain water harvesting, construction of cannal should be promoted. 
Construction of dams may also prove beneficial.  
 
(c) Coal and petroleum  
(i) Use of coal and petroleum as a source of energy should be minimised,  
(ii) Use of CNG or LPG as fuels in automobiles.  
(iii) Renewable sources of energy like solar power, hydropower, wind energy, tidal energy, 
etc., should be used. It is a better to walk over a sho rt distance rather than going by car or 
scooter.  
 
Q5. What can you as an individual do to reduce your consumption of the various natural 
resources?  
Ans:  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TGT(Maths)                 Page - 189 - 
 Natural resources such as water, forests, coal and petroleum, etc. are important for the survival 
of human beings. The ways in which we can reduce the consumption of various natural 
resources are as follows:  
(i) We should stop the cutting of trees (deforestation).  
(ii) We should use recycled paper to reduce the cutting down of trees.  
(iii) We should not wa ste water.  
(iv) We should practice rainwater harvesting.  
(v) We should practice car pooling to avoid the excessive use of petroleum.  
(vi) We should use alternative sources of energy such as hydro -energy and solar energy.  
 
Q6. List five things you have done  over the last one week to – (a) conserve our natural 
resources. (b) increase the pressure on our natural resources.  
Ans:  
(a) Conserve our natural resources  
(i) Limited use of water  
(ii) Plantation in free areas  
(iii) Irrigation of plants  
(iv) Limited use  of petrol/diesel  
(v) Smokeless fuel utilization  
 
(b) Increase the pressure on our natural resources  
(i) Extra use of water  
(ii) Day and night lighting  
(iii) Unnecessary trafficking by car  
(iv) Burning of polythene and wastes  
(v) Destroy the plants  
 
Q7. On  the basis of the issues raised in this chapter, what changes would you incorporate 
in your life -style in a move towards a sustainable use of our resources?  
Ans:  
One should incorporate the following changes in life -style in a move towards a sustainable us e 
of our resources:  
(i) Stop cutting trees and practice plantation of trees.  
(ii) Stop using plastic and polythene bags for carrying goods.  
(iii) Use recycled paper.  
(iv) Throw biodegradable and non -biodegradable waste into separate bins.  
(v) Waste minimum  amount of water while using and repair leaking taps.  
(vi) Practice rainwater harvesting.  
(vi) Avoid using vehicles for short distances. Instead, one can walk or cycle to cover short 
distances. To cover long distances, one should take a bus instead of usin g personal vehicles.  
(vii) Switch off electrical appliances when not in use.  
(viii) Use fluorescent tubes in place of bulbs to save electricity.  
(ix) Take stairs and avoid using lifts.  
(x) During winters, wear an extra sweater to avoid using heaters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
