Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 35 - 
 CHAPTER – 6 
 
TISSUES  
 
 
TISSUES  
 
The body of plants and animals  is made up of different types of cells.  These cells originate 
from a single cell by  repeated divisions and get differentiated  during development.  In 
unicellular organisms all the body  functions are performed by a single cell.  But in multicellular 
organisms, different  functions are performed by different  groups of cells.  
The groups of cells having a common  origin and performing similar functions  are called 
tissues . Several tissues are  organized to form tissue system and  the tis sue systems form the 
organs and  several organs into organism.  
 
 
 
Study of tissues is called Histology  
 
Tissue and Division of Labour: In complex organisms, different tasks are carried out by 
different organs and organ systems. Tissues are the first step t owards division of labour in 
complex organisms.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 69  
 
Q1. What is a tissue?  
Answer:   A group of cells that are similar in structure and/or work together to achieve a 
particular function is called tissue.  
 
Q2. What is the utility of tissues in multi -cellular organisms?  
Answer:   In multicellular organisms, the body system is based on the division of labour. It 
means the cells performing a specific function are grouped together to form a particular tissue. 
The different tissues are organized in a way to provide highest efficiency in functioning of the 
body.  
 
PLANT TISSUES  
 
Plant tissues are of two main types, viz. meristematic tissue and permanent tissue.  
 
MERISTEMATIC TISSUE  
 
The growth of plants occurs only in certain specific reg ions. This is because the dividing tissue 
also known as meristematic tissue (Meristos – divisible) is located only at these points.  
 
The meristematic tissues are made  up of group of similar and immature cells,  which can divide 
and form new cells.  Meristema tic cells divide continuously  and thus help in increasing the 
length and  thickness of the plant. Depending upon  the position, meristematic tissues are of  
three types. They are as follows:  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 36 - 
  
i) Apical meristems: Apical  meristem is present at the growing  tips of stems and roots and  
increases the length of the plant  body.  They are responsible for growth in length, i.e. primary 
growth.  
ii) Intercalary meristems: These  meristems occupy base of the  leaves and the base of the 
internodal  regions in plants such as gr asses  (mostly in monocotyledonous  plants). These help 
in elongation of  the internodes.  
iii) Lateral meristems: This includes the meristematic tissues  occupying the lateral regions of  
the stems and roots which bring  about increase in the width of the  
plant body. (e.g. Cork cambium  and Vascular cambium).  
 
Characteristic features of Meristematic tissues  
The meristematic cells may  be round, oval, polygonal or  rectangular in shape.  
Their cell walls are thin, elastic and  made up of cellulose.  
They are closely ar ranged without  intercellular spaces.  
They have dense cytoplasm with  large nucleus.  
 
PERMANENT TISSUE:   
 
Once the cells of meristematic tissue divide to a certain extent, they become specialized for a 
particular function. This process is called differentiat ion. Once differentiation is accomplished, 
the cells lose their capability to divide and the tissue becomes permanent tissue.  
Some cells produced by meristematic tissues stop dividing and form a permanent tissue. They 
have definite structure and function.  They are differentiated into various types to perform 
different functions.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 37 - 
 The permanent tissues are classified as  
i) Simple tissues and  
ii) Complex tissues  
 
SIMPLE TISSUES  
 
A tissue with the cells of similar  structure (one type of cells) and function  is called simple 
tissue. It is of three types.  
 
1. Parenchyma  
2. Collenchyma  
3. Sclerenchyma  
 
 
PARENCHYMA  
 
The cells of parenchyma have thin cell wall. They are loosely packed; with lot of intercellular 
spaces between them. They are  living cells. They are  generally  present in all organs of a plant.  
They are oval or spherical or rectangular  or cylindrical in shape. The cell wall is  made of 
cellulose and pectic materials.  Parenchyma makes the largest portion of a plant body. 
Parenchyma mainly works are packing materia l in plant parts. The main function of 
parenchyma is to provide support and to store food. In some plant parts, parenchyma has 
chlorophyll as well. In that case, parenchyma carries out photosynthesis and is then termed as 
chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, l arge air cavities are present in parenchyma. This provides 
buoyancy to the plant, and then the parenchyma is known as aerenchyma.  
 
 
COLLENCHYMA  
 
The cells of collenchyma are polygonal in cross section and have unevenly thickened walls. 
These thickenings a re due to the deposition of more cellulose, hemi -cellulose and pectin. The 
thickening is confined to the corners of the cells. They generally occur in the dicot stem in two 
or more layers below the epidermis. It is absent in the roots. It also occurs in pe tiole and 
pedicel. Like Parenchyma, Collenchyma is also a living tissue. The main function of 
Collenchyma is to provide strength and flexibility to the growing organs like young stem.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 38 - 
 
 
SCLERENCHYMA  
 
It is a dead tissue. The cells are thick with lignified  walls. They give mechanical support to the 
organs. This has two types of cells – Sclereids and Fibres.  
Sclereids  
Sclereids are stone cells which are commonly found in shells of the nut, pulp of certain fruits 
such as Pear and Sapota.  
 
Fibres  
The fibres ar e elongated strands with simple pits throughout its length.  
 
 
 
COMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUES  
 
XYLEM  
 
Xylem is mainly concerned with the transport of nutrients, water and minerals upwards in the 
plant body. It forms a continuous tube through the roots, stems,  leaves, flowers and fruits by 
the fusion of elongated cells.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 39 - 
 It is composed of different kinds of cells namely,  
1. Tracheids  
2. Xylem vessels.  
3. Xylem fibres  
4. Xylem parenchyma.  
 
Tracheids  
Tracheids are elongated, tapering cells with blunt ends. They have lignified  secondary wall. 
They are the chief water conducting elements in Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms.  
 
Xylem vessels  
Xylem vessels have perforations at the end and are placed one above the other like a long pipe 
line. They are seen in the xylem of angiosperms. T hey conduct water, mineral nutrients and 
also provide mechanical strength to the plant body.  
 
Xylem Fibres  
The fibres of Sclerenchyma associated with the xylem are known as xylem fibres. They give 
additional mechanical strength to the plant. They are also called wood fibres.  
 
Xylem Parenchyma  
The parenchyma cells associated with xylem are known as xylem parenchyma. It is the only 
living tissue amongst xylem cells. They store food reserves in the form of starch and fat. They 
also help in conduction of water.  
 
PHLOEM  
 
Phloem conducts food materials from leaves to the other parts of the plant. It is made up of 
four types of cells.  
1. Sieve elements  
2. Companion cells  
3. Phloem fibres  
4. Phloem parenchyma  
 
Sieve elements  
Sieve elements are the conducting elements of the ph loem. Sieve elements are of two types – 
sieve cells and sieve tubes.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 40 - 
 Sieve cells are present in Pteridophytes and Gymnosperms where as sieve tubes are present in 
Angiosperms.  
 
Companion cells  
Companion cells are thin walled elongated specialized Parenchyma  cells. They are associated 
with sieve elements. They have a prominent nucleus and cytoplasm. They help the sieve tube 
in conduction of food materials in angiosperms.  
 
Phloem fibres  
The fibres of sclerenchyma associated with phloem are called phloem fibres . 
They are also called bast -fibres. They give mechanical support to the plant. Among the four 
types of phloem cells, phloem fibres are the only dead tissues.  
 
Phloem parenchyma  
The parenchyma cells associated with phloem are called phloem parenchyma. They store 
starch and fats.  
 
ANIMAL TISSUES   
 
Animal tissues are of four types, viz. epithelial tissue, connective tissue, muscular tissue and 
nervous tissue.  
 
EPITHELIAL TISSUE:   
 
The epithelial tissue forms the covering or lining of most of the organs. The cells of epithelial 
tissue are tightly packed and form a continuous sheet. There is small amount of cementing 
materials between the cells and no intercellular space is present. Permeability of the epithelial 
tissue plays a great role in exchange of materia ls among various organs it also plays an 
important role in osmoregulation. All epithelial tissues are separated by the underlying tissue 
by an extracellular fibrous basement membrane.  
Epithelial tissues are of following types:  
1. Simple Epithelium  
2. Cuboidal E pithelium  
3. Columnar Epithelium  
4. Stratified Epithelium  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 41 - 
 Simple Epithelium  
The simple epithelium is composed of a single layer of cells. This type of epithelial tissue 
forms the lining of blood vessels and alveoli. Thin layer of cells facilitates exchange of 
substances; in such cases.  
 
Cuboidal Epithelium  
The cells are cube -shaped in cuboidal epithelium. Linings of kidney tubules and ducts of 
salivary glands are composed of cuboidal epithelium. Cuboidal cells provide mechanical 
support. Cells of epithelium may  play the role of secretion and then they are called glandular 
epithelium.  
 
 
Columnar Epithelium  
Cells are column -shaped in columnar epithelium. Columnar epithelium facilitates secretion and 
absorption. For example; the lining of intestine is composed of  columnar epithelium. In some 
organs, columnar epithelium has cilia present on the outer surface. Cilia facilitate movements 
of certain substances. The ciliated epithelium in the respiratory tract pushes the mucus forward.  
 
Stratified Epithelium  
Cells of the stratified epithelium are in many layers. Skin is an example of stratified 
epithelium. Stratification of layers prevents wear and tear.  
 
CONNECTIVE TISSUE:   
 
The cells of a connective tissue are loosely scattered in a matrix. The matrix can be a fluid , 
jelly like, dense or rigid. The nature of matrix depends on the function a connective tissue 
serves. Following are the various connective tissues:  
 
Areolar (Loose) Connective Tissue  
Areolar tissue is found between skin and muscles, around blood vessels and nerves and in bone 
marrow. Areolar tissue fills the gap between tissues and provides support. It also helps in repair 
of tissues.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 42 - 
 Dense connective tissue(Fibrous connective tissue)  
It has thicker, denser fibers and fewer cells. The matrix is made up  mostly of collagen fibers, 
with fibroblasts arranged in rows. This type of connective tissue forms tendons and ligaments, 
which attach muscle to bone and bone to bone, respectively.  
 
Adipose Tissue  
Adipose tissue is composed of fat globules. This tissue i s found below the skin and beneath the 
organs. Adipose tissue provides insulation and works as a cushion.  
 
Bone  
Bone is mainly composed of osteoblasts. Bone makes the skeletal system. Skeletal system is 
responsible for providing structural framework to th e body. It provides protection to important 
organs and facilitates movements.  
 
Cartilage  
Cartilage is mainly composed of chondrioblasts. Cartilage is present at the ends of articulatory 
bones. Cartilage is also present in external ear, bronchii, etc.  
 
Blood 
Blood is composed of blood cells, platelets and plasma. Blood plays an important role in 
transportation of various substances in the body. It also helps in osmoregulation and 
temperature control.  
 
 
 
MUSCULAR TISSUE   
 
Muscular tissue is composed of mu scle cells. Muscle cells are specialized cells which have the 
capability to contract and expand. Due to contraction and expansion, muscles facilitate various 
kinds of movements in the body. Muscular tissues are of three types:  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 43 - 
 
 
Striated Muscles  
The cells  of striated muscles are in the form of long, unbranched fibres. Cells are 
multinucleate. Light and dark bands (striations) are present on muscle fibres; which gives the 
name striated muscles. Striated muscles are found in those organs where voluntary move ment 
is possible, e.g. hands, legs, back, neck, etc.  
 
Smooth Muscles  
The cells of smooth muscles are spindle shaped and each has one nucleus. Smooth muscle is 
found in those organs where involuntary movement is possible, e.g. alimentary canal.  
 
Cardiac Mu scles  
The cells of cardiac muscles are in the form of branched fibres. Striations are present and cells 
are uninucleate. These are found in the heart. Cardiac muscles are capable continuous 
contraction and relaxation throughout the life.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 44 - 
 NERVOUS TISSUE  
 
 All cells possess the ability to respond to stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue are 
highly specialised for being stimulated and then transmitting the stimulus very rapidly from 
one place to another within the body. The brain, spinal cord and n erves are all composed of the 
nervous tissue. The cells of this tissue are called nerve cells or neurons.  
A neuron consists of a cell body with a nucleus and cytoplasm, from which long thin hair -like 
parts arise.  
 
Usually each neuron has a single long par t, called the axon, and many short, branched parts 
called dendrites. An individual nerve cell may be up to a metre long. Many nerve fibres bound 
together by connective tissue make up a nerve.  
 
SUMMARY  
CLASSIFICATION OF PLANT TISSUE  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 47 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 74  
 
Q1. Name types of simple tissues.  
Answer:   The three main types of simple tissues are: (i) Parenchyma (ii) Collenchyma (iii) 
Sclerenchyma  
 
Q2. Where is apical meristem found?  
Answer:  Apical meristem is  present in growing tips of stems and roots of plants. It helps in 
increasing the length of the stem and the root.  
 
Q3. Which tissue makes up the husk of coconut?  
Answer:   The husk of coconut is made up of sclerenchymatous tissue.  
 
Q4. What are the consti tuents of phloem?  
Answer:   The constituents of phloem tissue are:  
(i) Sieve tubes (tubular living cells with perforated end walls)  
(ii) Companion cell (living cells)  
(iii) Phloem parenchyma (living cells)  
(iv) Phloem fibres (non -living and sclerenchyma ce lls) 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 78  
 
Q1. Name the tissue responsible for movement in our body.  
Answer:  The movement of our body depends on muscular tissue. It consists of elongated cells 
(muscle fibres).  
 
Q2. What does a neuron look like?  
Answer:  A neuron  consists of a cell body witha nucleus and cytoplasm. It has two important 
extensions known as the axon and dendrites. An axon is a long thread -like extension of nerve 
cells that transmits impulses away from the cell body. Dendrites, on the other hand, are  thread -
like extensions of cell body that receive nerve impulses. Thus, the axon transmits impulses 
away from the cell body, whereas the dendrite receives nerve impulses. This coordinated 
function helps in transmitting impulses very quickly.  
  
Q3. Give th ree features of cardiac muscles.  
Answer:  Three features of cardiac muscles are:  
(i) Cardiac muscles are involuntary muscles that contract rapidly, but do not get fatigued.  
(ii) The cells of cardiac muscles are cylindrical, branched, and uninucleate.  
(iii) They control the contraction and relaxation of the heart.  
 
Q4. What are the functions of areolar tissue?  
Answer:  Functions of areolar tissue:  
(i) It helps in supporting internal organs.  
(ii) It helps in repairing the tissues of the skin and muscles.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 48 - 
 EXER CISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 66 and 67  
 
Q1. Define the term “tissue”.  
Answer:  A group of cells that are similar in structure and/or work together to achieve a 
particular function is called tissue.  
 
Q2. How many types of elements together make up the xylem tis sue? Name them.  
Answer:  The following four types of elements make up xylem tissue:  
(i) Xylem tracheids (tubular unicellular).  
(ii) Xylem vessels (multicellular).  
(iii) Xylem parenchyma (stores food and helps in sideways conduction of water).  
(iv) Xylem fi bres (provide mechanical support).  
 
Q3. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants?  
Answer:   
Simple tissue  Complex tissue  
These tissues consist of only one 
type of cells.  These tissues are made up of more than one 
type of cells.  
 
The cells are more or less similar in 
structure and perform similar 
functions.  Different types of cells perform different 
functions. For example, in the xylem tissue, 
tracheids help in water transport, whereas 
parenchyma stores food.  
Three types of simple t issues in 
plants are parenchyma, 
collenchyma, and sclerenchyma.  Two types of complex permanent tissues in 
plants are xylem and phloem.  
 
Q4. Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of 
their cell wall.  
Answer:   
Parenchym a Collenchyma  Sclerenchyma  
Cell walls are relatively 
thin, and the cells in 
parenchyma tissues are 
loosely packed.  The cell wall is irregularly 
thickened at the corners, 
and there is very little space 
between the cells.  The cell walls are uniformly 
thicke ned, and there are no 
intercellular spaces.  
The cell wall in this tissue is 
made up of cellulose.  Pectin and hemicellulose 
are the major constituents of 
the cell wall.  An additional layer of the 
cell wall composed mainly 
of lignin is found.  
 
Q5. What are  the functions of the stomata?  
Answer:  Functions of the stomata:  
(i) They allow the exchange of gases (CO 2 and O 2) with the atmosphere.  
(ii) Evaporation of water from the leaf surface occurs through the stomata. Thus, the stomata 
help in the process of tr anspiration.  
 
Q6. Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres.  
Answer:   
The three types of muscle fibres are:  
Striated muscles, smooth muscles (unstriated muscle fibre), and cardiac muscles.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 49 - 
 
 
Q7. What is the specific fun ction of the cardiac muscle?  
Answer:  The specific function of the cardiac muscle is to control the contraction and 
relaxation of the heart.  
 
Q8. Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their 
structure and site/locati on in the body.  
Answer:   
Striated muscle  Unstriated muscle  Cardiac muscle  
On the basis of structure:  
Cells are cylindrical   Cells are long   Cells are cylindrical  
Cells are not branched  Cells are not branched  Cells are branched  
Cells are multinucleate  Cells are uninucleate   Cells are uninucleate   
Alternate light and dark 
bands are present  There are no bands present  Faint bands are present  
Its ends are blunt  Its ends are tapering  Its ends are flat and wavy  
On the basis of location:  
These muscles are 
present in body parts 
such as hands, legs, 
tongue, etc.  These muscles control the 
movement of food in the alimentary 
canal, the contraction and 
relaxation of blood vessels, etc.  These muscles control the 
contraction and relaxation 
of the heart  
 
Q9. Draw a  labelled diagram of a neuron.  
Answer:   
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 50 - 
  
Q10. Name the following.  
(a) Tissue that forms the inner lining of our mouth.  
(b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans.  
(c) Tissue that transports food in plants.  
(d) Tissue that stores fat in our body.  
(e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix.  
(f) Tissue present in the brain.  
Answer:   
(a) Tissue that forms the inner lining of our mouth → Epithelial tissue  
(b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans → Dense regular connective tissue 
(tendons)  
(c) Tissue that transports food in plants → Phloem  
(d) Tissue that stores fat in our body → Adipose tissue  
(e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix → Blood 
(f) Tissue present in the brain → Nervous tissue  
 
Q11. Identify the type of tissue in the following: sk in, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney 
tubule, vascular bundle.  
Answer:   
Skin: Stratified squamous epithelial tissue  
Bark of tree: Simple permanent tissue  
Bone: Connective tissue  
Lining of kidney tubule: Cuboidal epithelial tissue  
Vascular bundle: Compl ex permanent tissue  
 
Q12. Name the regions in which parenchyma tissue is present.  
Answer:   
Leaves, fruits, and flowers are the regions where the parenchyma tissue is present.  
 
Q13. What is the role of epidermis in plants?  
Answer:   
Epidermisis present on the outer surface of the entire plant body. The cells of the epidermal 
tissue form a continuous layer without any intercellular space. It performs the following 
important functions:  
(i) It is a protective tissue of the plant body  
(ii) It protects the plant  against mechanical injury  
(iii) It allows exchange of gases through the stomata  
 
Q14. How does the cork act as a protective tissue?  
Answer:   
The outer protective layer or bark of a tree is known as the cork. It is made up of dead cells. 
Therefore, it pro tects the plant against mechanical injury, temperature extremes, etc. It also 
prevents the loss of water by evaporation.  
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 70 - 
 CHAPTER – 7 
 
DIVERSITY IN LIVING ORGANIS MS  
 
 
CLASSIFICATION  
Biodiversity: The variety of living beings found in geographical area is called biodiversity of 
that area. Amazon rainforests is the largest biodiversity hotspot in the world.  
Need for Classification: Classification is necessary for ea sier study of living beings. Without 
proper classification, it would be impossible to study millions of organisms which exist on this 
earth.  
 
BASIS OF CLASSIFICATION  
Ancient Greek thinker Aristotle classified living beings on the basis of their habitat. H e 
classified them into two groups, i.e. those living in water and those living on land. But his 
classification was too simple to justify inclusion of a particular organism into a particular 
group.  
Some examples of scientific bases of classification are as  follows:  
Organization of nucleus: Nucleus may or may not be organized in an organism. On this basis, 
organisms can be divided into two groups, viz. prokaryotes and eukaryotes.  
 
(a) Prokaryotes:  
When nucleus is not organized, i.e. nuclear materials are not membrane bound; the organism is 
called prokaryote.  
(b) Eukaryotes:  
When nucleus is organized, i.e. nuclear materials are membrane bound; the organism is called 
eukaryote.  
 
Number of cells: An organism can be composed of a single cell or many cells. An organism 
with a single cell is called unicellular organism. On the other hand, an organism with more 
than one cell is called multicellular organism.  
 
Mode of Nutrition  
On this basis, organisms can be divided into two broad groups, i.e. autotrophs and 
heterotrophs. An autotroph makes its own food, while a heterotroph depends on other 
organisms for food.  
 
Level of Organisation  
Even in case of multicellular organisms, there can be different levels of organization. When a 
cell is responsible for all the li fe processes, it is called cellular level or organization. When 
some cells group together to perform specific function, it is called tissue level of organization. 
When tissues group together to form some organs, it is called organ level of organization. 
Similarly organ system level of organization is seen in complex organisms.  
 
Classification and Evolution  
It is a well established fact that all the life forms have evolved from a common ancestor. 
Scientists have proved that the life begun on the earth in th e form of simple life forms. During 
the course of time, complex organism evolved from them. So, classification is also based on 
evolution. A simple organism is considered to be primitive while a complex organism is 
considered to be advanced.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 71 - 
 
 
 
 
FIVE KI NGDOM CLASSIFICATION BY ROBERT WHITTAKER (1959)   
 
This is the most accepted system of classification.  
The classification Whittaker proposed has five kingdoms: Monera, Protista, Fungi, Plantae and 
Animalia, and is widely used. These groups are formed on t he basis of their cell structure, 
mode and source of nutrition and body organisation. Further classification is 
done by naming the sub -groups at various levels as given in the following 
scheme:  
 
Thus, by separating organisms on the basis of a hierarchy of characteristics into 
smaller and smaller groups, we arrive at the basic unit of classification, which is 
a ‘species’. The important characteristics of the five kingdoms of Whittaker are 
as follows:  
 
 
 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 72 - 
 
 
 
 
1. MONERA  
 
These are prokaryotes; which means nuclear materials are not membrane bound in them. They 
may or may not have cell wal l.  
The mode of nutrition of organisms in this group can be either by synthesising their own food 
(autotrophic) or getting it from the environment (heterotrophic).  
All organisms of this kingdom are unicellular. Examples: bacteria, blue green algae 
(cyanoba cteria) and mycoplasma.  
 
      
  
 
2. PROTISTA  
 
These are eukaryotes and unicellular. Some organisms use cilia or flagella for locomotion. 
They can be autotrophic or heterotrophic. Examples: unicellular algae, diatoms and protozoans.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 73 - 
 
 
 
3. FUNGI  
 
These a re heterotrohic and have cell wall. The cell wall is made of chitin. Most of the fungi are 
unicellular. Many of them have the capacity to become multicellular at certain stage in life. 
They feed on decaying organic materials. Such a mode of nutrition is ca lled saprophytic. Some 
fungi live in symbiotic relationship with other organisms, while some are parasites as well. 
Examples: yeast, penicillum, aspergillus, mucor, etc.  
 
4. PLANTAE  
These are multicellular and autotrophs. Presence of chlorophyll is a dis tinct characteristic of 
plants, because of which they are capable of doing photosynthesis. Cell wall is present.  
  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 74 - 
 5. ANIMALIA  
These are multicellular and heterotophs. Cell wall is absent.  
 
 
PLANTAE (PLANT KINGDOM)  
The Plant Kingdom can be further classified into five divisions. Their key characteristics are 
given below:  
 
1. THALLOPHYTA  
The plant body is simple thallus type. The p lant body is not differentiated into root, stem and 
leaves. They are commonly known as algae. Examples: Spirogyra, chara, volvox, ulothtrix, etc.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 75 - 
 2. BRYOPHYTA  
 
Plant body is differentiated into stem and leaf like structure. Vascular system is absent, wh ich 
means there is no specialized tissue for transportation of water, minerals and food. Bryophytes 
are also known as the amphibians of the plant kingdom, because they need water to complete a 
part of their life cycle. Examples: Moss, marchantia.  
 
3. PTE RIDOPHYTA  
 
Plant body is differentiated into root, stem and leaf. Vascular system is present. They do not 
bear seeds and hence are called cryptogams. Plants of rest of the divisions bear seeds and hence 
are called phanerogams. Examples: Marsilear, ferns, h orse tails, etc.  
 
 
 
4. GYMNOSPERMS  
They bear seeds. Seeds are naked, i.e. are not covered. The word ‘gymnos’ means naked and 
‘sperma’ means seed. They are perennial plants. Examples: Pine, cycas, deodar, etc.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 76 - 
 
 
 
5. ANGIOSPERMS  
The seeds are covered. Th e word ‘angios’ means covered. There is great diversity in species of 
angiosperm. Angiosperms are also known as flowering plants, because flower is a specialized 
organ meant for reproduction. Angiosperms are further divided into two groups, viz. 
monocotyle donous and dicotyledonous.  
 
(a) Monocotyledonous  
There is single seed leaf in a seed. A seed leaf is a baby plant. Examples: wheat, rice, maize, 
etc.  
(b) Dicotyledonous  
There are two cotyledons in a seed. Examples: Mustard, gram, mango, etc.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 77 - 
 KINGDOM AN IMALIA  
The animal kingdom is classified into different phyla. Their detail is given below:  
 
 
 
1. PORIFERA  
These animals have pores all over their body. The pores lead into the canal system. Water 
flows through the canal system and facilitates entry of fo od and exchange of other materials. 
The animal is not differentiated into tissues. The body is covered with a hard outer skeleton. 
These are commonly known as sponges. They are marine animals. Examples: Sycon, spongilla, 
euplectelea, etc.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 78 - 
 2. COELENTERA TA 
The body is made up of a coelom (cavity) with a single opening. The body wall is made up of 
two layers of cells (diploblastic). Some of the species live a solitary life while others live in 
colonies. Examples: Hydra, Jelly fish, Sea anemone, etc.  
 
3. PLATYHELMINTHES  
The body is flattened from top to bottom and hence the name platyhelminthes. These are 
commonly known as flatworms. The body wall is composed of three layers of cells 
(triploblastic). Because of three layers, it is possible to form some orga ns as well. But a proper 
ceolom is absent in platyhelminthes and hence proper organs are absent. They are free -living or 
parasitic animals. Examples: Planaria, liver fluke, tapeworm, etc.  
 
4. NEMATOHELMINTHES  
The body is bilaterally symmetric and 
there are three layers in the body 
wall. Animals are cylindrical in 
shape. A pseudocoelom is present 
and hence organs are absent. 
Examples: Roundworms, pinworms, 
filarial parasite (Wuchereria), etc.  
 
5. ANNELIDA  
True body cavity is present in these 
animals. The  body is divided into 
segments and hence the name 
annelida. Each segment is lined one 
after another and contains a set of 
organs. Examples: Earthworm, leech, 
Nereis, etc.  
 
6. ARTHROPODA  
Animals have jointed appendages 
which gives the name arthropoda. Exos keleton is present which is made of chitin. This is the 

Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 79 - 
 largest group of animals; in terms of number of species. Circulatory system is open, which 
means blood flows in the coelomic cavity. Examples: cockroach, housefly, spider, prawn, 
scorpion, etc.  
 
 
7. MOLLUSCA  
The animal has soft body; which is enclosed in a hard shell. The shell is made of calcium 
carbonate. Circulatory system is open and kidney like organ is present for excretion. The body 
has well developed muscular feet for locomotion. Examples: Sn ail, mussels, octopus, etc.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 80 - 
 8. ECHINODERMATA  
The body is covered with spines, which gives the name echinodermata. Body is radially 
symmetrical. The animals have well developed water canal system, which is used for 
locomotion. Skeleton is made of calcium  carbonate. Examples: Starfish, sea urchins, etc.  
 
9. PROTOCHORDATA  
Animals are bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic and ceolomate. Notochord is present at least 
at some stages of life. Notochord is a long rod -like structure which runs along the back o f the 
animal. This provides attachment points for muscles. It also separates the nervous tissues from 
the gut. Examples: Balanoglossus, herdmania, amphioxus, etc.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 81 - 
 10. VERTEBRATA:  
The notochord is replaced by a spinal column during embryonic stage. Follo wing are the main 
characteristics of vertebrates:  
Notochord present; which is replaced by spinal column.  
Dorsal nerve chord is present.  
Animals are triploblastic and coelomate.  
Animals have paired gill pouches.  
Vertebrates are divided into two super cl asses, viz. pisces and tetrapoda.  
 
A. PISCES   
They are commonly known as fish. The body is streamlined. Muscular tail is present which 
assists in locomotion. Body is covered with scales. Paired gills are present; which can breathe 
oxygen dissolved in wate r. They are cold -blooded animals. The heart has only two chambers. 
They lay eggs. Fishes can be bony or cartilaginous. Shark is an example of cartilaginous fish. 
Rohu and katla are examples of bony fish.  
 
B. TETRAPODA  
Animals have four limbs for locomoti on and hence the name tetrapoda. Tetrapoda is divided 
into four classes, viz. amphibia, reptilia, aves and mammalia.  
 (1) Amphibia:   
These animals are adapted to live both in water and land. Mucus glands on skin keep the skin 
moist. The animals breathe th rough skin when in water and through lungs when on land. The 
heart has three chambers. These are cold blooded animals. Examples: Frog, toad, salamander, 
etc.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 82 - 
 (2) Reptilia:   
These animals show crawling movement for locomotion. Skin is hardened to form sc ales. Most 
of the reptilians have three chambered heart but crocodile has four -chambered heart. They 
don’t need water to lay eggs, rather eggs are covered with hard shells and laid on land. 
Examples: snakes, lizards, crocodile, turtle, etc.  
 
 
 
(3) Aves:   
The body is covered with feathers. Forelimbs are modified into wings. These are warm -
blooded animals. The heart has four chambers. Bones are hollow (pneumatic); which assists in 
flying. All the birds belong to this class.  
 
 
(4) Mammalia:   
The body is co vered with hairs. Skin has seat glands and sebaceous glands. Mammary glands 
are present in females and are used for nourishing the young ones. Most of the mammalians 
give birth to young ones and are called viviparous. Some of the mammals lay eggs and are 
called oviparous. Examples: human, chimpanzee, lion, platypus, horse, etc.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 83 - 
 
 
 
BINOMIAL NOMENCLATURE OF ORGANISMS:   
The system of binomial nomenclature was proposed by Carolus Linneaus (1707 – 1778). 
Conventions of writing biological name are as follows:   
The biological name is composed of two terms. The first term is called genetic name 
and the second term is called species name.  
The genus name starts with a capital letter, while the species name starts with a small 
letter.  
In print, the scientific nam e is written in italics.  
When handwritten, the genus name and species name need to be underlined separately.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 84 - 
 POINTS TO REMEMBER  
 
FIVE CLASSIFCATION OF KINGDOM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 85 - 
 PLANT KINGDOM  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 86 - 
 ANIMAL KINGDOM  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 88 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  82  
 
Q1. Which do you think is a more basic characteristic for classi fying organisms?  
(a) the place where they live.  
(b) the kind of cells they are made of. Why?  
Answer:  The kind of cells an organism is made of is more basic characteristic of classifying 
organism because it gives a scientific angle to classification. Mo reover, a particular dwelling 
place can be full of organisms of a wide variety.  
 
Q2. What is the primary characteristic on which the first division of organisms is made?  
Answer:  Organisation of nucleus is the primary characteristic on which the first di vision of 
organisms is made. Based on this, organisms can be either prokaryotic or eukaryotic.  
 
Q3. On what bases are plants and animals put into different categories?  
Answer:  Plants are autotrophs, while animals are heterotrophs. Cell wall is present i n plant 
cells, while it is absent in animal cells. Plants do not need to move from one place to another, 
while most of the animals need to move in search of food.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  83  
 
Q1. Which organisms are called primitive and how are they di fferent from the so -called 
advanced organisms?  
Answer:  An organism which is simple is called primitive. On the other hand, an organism 
with high level of division of labour; by formation of organs and organ system is called 
advanced.  
 
Q2. Will advanced organisms be the same as complex organisms? Why?  
Answer:  Complexity in body design evolves because of necessity to adapt according to the 
changing environment. Hence, a complex organism would be an advanced one; in comparison 
to a simple organism.  
 
INTE XT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  85  
 
Q1. What is the criterion for classification of organisms as belonging to kingdom Monera 
or Protista?  
Answer:  Organisms which are prokaryotes belong to the kingdom Monera. On the other hand, 
organisms which are eukaryotes and un icellular belong to the kingdom Protista.  
 
Q2. In which kingdom will you place an organism which is single -celled, eukaryotic and 
photosynthetic?  
Answer: Plant Kingdom  
 
Q3. In the hierarchy of classification, which grouping will have the smallest number  of 
organisms with a maximum of characteristics in common and which will have the largest 
number of organisms?  
Answer: Species will have the smallest number of organisms with a maximum of 
characteristics in common. On the contrary, kingdom will have the l argest number of 
organisms.  
  
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  88  
 
Q1. Which division among plants has the simplest organisms?  
Answer: Thallophyta  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 89 - 
 Q2. How are pteridophytes different from the phanerogams?  
Answer: In pteridophytes, the reproductive organs are hidden and they do not produce seeds. 
In phaenrogams, reproductive organs are conspicuous and they produce seeds.  
 
Q3. How do gymnosperms and angiosperms differ from each other?  
Answer: Seeds are naked in gymnosperms, while they are covered in angiosperm s. 
Gymnosperms do not bear flowers, while angiosperms bear flowers.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  94  
 
Q1. How do poriferan animals differ from coelenterate animals?  
Answer: In porifera, body has numerous pores, which are absent in coelenterates. Body has a  
cavity in coelenterates, while it is absent in porifera.  
 
Q2. How do annelid animals differ from arthropods?  
Answer: Segmented body in annelids, while true segmentation is absent in arthropods. 
Arthropods have joined appendages, which are absent in anne lids.  
 
Q3. What are the differences between amphibians and reptiles?  
Answer: Amphibians need water to lay eggs and fertilization is external. Reptilians do not 
need water to lay eggs and fertilization is internal. Amphibians use both skin and lungs for 
breathing. Reptilians breathe through lungs only.  
 
Q4. What are the differences between animals belonging to the Aves group and those in 
the mammalian group?  
Answer:  In aves, body is covered with feathers; while in mammals, body is covered with 
hairs. Ma mmary glands are absent in aves. Forelimbs of aves are modified into wings which is 
not the case in mammals. Aves are oviparous, while most of the mammals are viviparous.  
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 43, 44  
 
Q1. What are the advantages of classifying org anisms?  
Answer: -  There are millions of species on this earth. For anybody, it is impossible to study 
about each of them in his lifetime. Classification makes it easy to study the organisms; on the 
basis of certain common characters.  
 
Q2. How would you c hoose between two characteristics to be used for developing a 
hierarchy in classification?  
Answer: -  We need to look at the fact if given character is present in a small number of 
organisms or a larger number of organisms. In the first case, the commonali ty of characters 
would represent a species. In the latter case, the commonality of characters would represent a 
higher taxa; like genus, family, order or phylum.  
Q3. Explain the basis for grouping organisms into five kingdoms.  
Answer: Following points ex plain the basis of grouping organisms into five kingdoms.  
Organization of nucleus: Organisms with unorganized nucleus are kept under the kingdom 
Monera. Those with organized nucleus are kept in other kingdoms.  
Number of cells: - Unicellular eukaryotes are  kept in the kingdom Protista, while multicellular 
eukaryotes are kept in other kingdoms.  
Mode of nutrition and presence of cell wall: Hetereotrophic organisms in which cell wall is 
present are taken under the kingdom fungi. Autotrophic organisms in which  cell wall is present 
are taken in the kingdom Plantae. Organisms in which cell wall is absent are taken in the 
kingdom Animalia.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 90 - 
 Q4. What are the major divisions in the Plantae? What is the basis for these divisions?  
Answer: The major divisions of Plan tae and the basis for these divisions are as follows:  
Thallophyta: Simple body design; with no differentiation into root, stem and leaves.  
Bryophyta: Body is differentiated into stem and leaf -like structures. Vascular system is 
absent.  
Pteridophyta: Body is differentiated into root, stem and leaves. Vascular system is 
present. Reproductive organs are inconspicuous. Seeds are not produced.  
Gymnosperms: Seeds are naked.  
Angiosperms: Seeds are covered.  
 
Q5. How are the criteria for deciding divisions in plants different from the criteria for 
deciding the subgroups among animals?  
Answer: In the plant kingdom, morphological characters are taken into consideration while 
deciding about the divisions. Morphology is the study of shapes and forms of various par ts. In 
the animal kingdom, anatomical characters are taken into consideration while deciding about 
subgroups. Anatomy is the study of various organs’ design in animals.  
 
Q6. Explain how animals in Vertebrata are classified into further subgroups.  
Answer:  Vertebrates are classified into further subgroups on following bases:  
1. Pisces:  The body is streamlined. Muscular tail is present which assists in locomotion. 
Body is covered with scales. Paired gills are present; which can breathe oxygen 
dissolved in wate r. They are cold -blooded animals. The heart has only two chambers. 
They lay eggs.  
 
2. Tetrapoda:  Animals have four limbs for locomotion and hence the name tetrapoda. 
Tetrapoda is divided into four classes, viz. amphibia, reptilia, aves and mammalia.  
a. Amphibi a: These animals are adapted to live both in water and land. Mucus 
glands on skin keep the skin moist. The animals breathe through skin when in 
water and through lungs when on land. The heart has three chambers. These are 
cold blooded animals. Examples: Fr og, toad, salamander, etc.  
b. Reptilia: These animals show crawling movement for locomotion. Skin is 
hardened to form scales. Most of the reptilians have three chambered heart but 
crocodile has four -chambered heart. They don’t need water to lay eggs, rather 
eggs are covered with hard shells and laid on land. Examples: snakes, lizards, 
crocodile, turtle, etc.  
c. Aves: The body is covered with feathers. Forelimbs are modified into wings. 
These are warm -blooded animals. The heart has four chambers. Bones are 
hollo w (pneumatic); which assists in flying. All the birds belong to this class.  
d. Mammalia: The body is covered with hairs. Skin has seat glands and sebaceous 
glands. Mammary glands are present in females and are used for nourishing the 
young ones. Most of the mammalians give birth to young ones and are called 
viviparous. Some of the mammals lay eggs and are called oviparous. Examples: 
human, chimpanzee, lion, platypus, horse, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 106 - 
  
CHAPTER – 13 
 
WHY DO WE FALL ILL  
 
 
HEALTH AND ITS FAILURE  
 
Good health is a very hard thing to measure, but it is one of life's most precious things. The 
World Health Organisation has defined health as a state of complete physical, mental and 
social well -being.  
Community health can be defined as "All the personal health along with the environmental 
services for the importance of health of community".  
 
Some of the health services are given below:  
(i) Establishment of health care services like primary health centers, district hospitals, 
community health centers, medical colleges, all Indian institutes, regional hospitals etc.  
(ii) Provision of safe drinkin g water and proper disposal of garbage.  
(iii) Prevention of harmful insect breeding sites.  
(iv) Management of different types of environmental pollution by Central and State Pollution 
Control Boards.  
(v) Preventive vaccinations against number of diseases l ike tuberculosis, diphtheria, whooping 
cough, tetanus, measles, hepatitis, etc.  
(vi) Provision of family planning advices and services.  
(vii) Provision of medical care to school going children.  
(viii) Prevention of food adulteration.  
(ix) Health education.  
 
CONDITIONS ESSENTIAL FOR GOOD HEALTH   
There are several conditions which have to be fulfilled for good health. The important ones are  
(i) Nutrition,   
(ii) Proper habits,  and 
(iii) Exercise and relaxation.  
 
 
(i) Nutrition   
Nutrition can be defined as t he procurement of substances necessary for growth, development, 
maintenance and activities of a living organism.  
We obtain food from various plant and animal sources. In order to keep healthy and energetic, 
we need to take food. It takes care of the daily energy need also. We consume energy even 
while sleeping. Energy requirement depends on individual, age and special need. Growing 
children, pregnant women and nursing mothers need more energy.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 107 - 
 (ii) Proper Habits   
Another important aspect of good health is t o observe proper dietary habits that are 
consumption of balanced diet and at fixed time. Good personal and domestic hygiene is very 
essential. Take full care of the following aspects.  
Your food should be fresh and kept away from dust, flies, insect and mic robes to avoid any 
infection and spoilage.  
Utensils should be kept clean.  
You should wash your face and hands with soap before eating or handling the food.  
Food should be cooked with good feelings and cheerful state.  
Smoking, chewing tobacco, drinking alco hol, taking addictive drugs are bad habits and 
should be avoided.  
They can have damaging effects on our body and mind.  
 
(iii) Exercise and Relaxation  
Regular exercise is necessary to keep our body fit. These exercises vary with age, physical 
condition and nature of work of the individual. In the case of sedentary worker, exercise is 
even more essential. Another aspect of health is regular sleep and relaxation. The duration of 
sleep also varies with age and nature of work. Infants sleep for long hours, which  is necessary 
for them to grow. For children, an average of eight hours of sound sleep is sufficient. For 
adults six hours of sleep is enough. Relaxation improves the capacity to work. Relaxation may 
be defined as an activity or recreation, which provides a relief or diversion from work or effort. 
There are various ways of relaxation. Yoga and meditation relax the body and mind. Listening 
to music and reading magazines are also relaxing.  
 
PERSONAL AND COMMUNITY ISSUES BOTH MATTER FOR HEALTH  
 
Health is a sta te of physical, mental and social well being. The conditions necessary for good 
health are : -  
i) Good physical and social environment.  
ii) Good economic conditions.  
iii) Social equality and harmony.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 108 - 
 Good physical and social environment includes clean  surroundings, good sanitation, 
proper garbage disposal and clean drinking water.  
Good economic conditions includes job opportunities for all for earning to have 
nutritious food and to lead a healthy life.  
Social equality and harmony are necessary for a healthy and peaceful life.  
 
DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN ‘HEALTHY’ AND ‘DISEASE -FREE’  
Healthy  Disease free  
It is a state of physical, mental and 
social well being.  It is a state of absence from diseases.  
It refers to the individual, physical 
and social environme nt. It refers only to the individual.  
The individual has good health.  The individual may have good health or poor health.  
 
DISEASE AND ITS CAUSES  
 
A person may be regarded as suffering from a disease when his body does not function 
properly. Minor and ma jor disorders of the body may lead to diseases. Infectious diseases are 
caused by germs. One of the greatest achievements in the history of mankind is the 
demonstration by Pasteur, Koch and others of germs or microbes that cause diseases. Microbes 
are the microscopic organisms such as virus, bacteria, some fungi and protozoans that are 
responsible for causing diseases in human beings. Cholera, tetanus, typhoid, diphtheria and 
pneumonia are some common diseases caused by bacteria. Polio, common cold, influen za, 
measles, chicken pox and AIDS are diseases caused by virus. Amoebic dysentery and malaria 
are caused by protozoans.  
 
Name of the disease  Medium  
Tuberculosis, pneumonia, diphtheria, 
influenza, measles and common cold  Air 
Cholera, typhoid, dysentery an d diarrhoea  Food, water  
Leprosy, ringworm and scabies  Skin contact  
Malaria, filarial and plaque  Insects  
 
ACUTE AND CHRONIC DISEASES  
When a person is affected by a disease either the normal functioning or the appearance of one 
or more systems of the bod y changes for the worse. These changes give rise to signs of the 
disease called symptoms. On the basis of the symptoms the physicians look for the signs of a 
particular disease and conduct tests to confirm the disease.  
Types of diseases : - Diseases are of  different types. They are : - i) Acute diseases : - a r e  
diseases which last only for a short period of time and does not have long term effect on health. 
Eg:- cold, cough, typhoid, cholera etc. ii) Chronic disease : - are diseases which lasts for a long 
time and has long term drastic effect on health. Eg : - diabetes, tuberculosis, elephantiasis, 
arthritis, cancer etc.  
Difference between Acute Disease and Chronic Disease  
Acute Disease  Chronic Disease  
They are short duration disease.  They are long lasting dis ease.  
Patient recovers completely after the 
cure.  Patient does not recover completely.  
There is no loss of weight or feeling of 
tiredness afterward.  There is often loss of weight of feeling of 
tiredness.  
There is short duration loss of work and 
effici ency.  There is a prolonged loss of work and 
efficiency.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 109 - 
 CHRONIC DISEASES AND POOR HEALTH  
 
Chronic disease is a disease that persists for a long time.  Chronic diseases are the major cause 
of death and disability worldwide.  
The total number of people dyin g from chronic diseases is double that of all infectious diseases 
(including HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria), maternal and parental conditions, and 
nutritional deficiencies combined. 80% of chronic disease deaths occur in low and middle 
income countrie s and half are in women. Without action to address the causes, deaths from 
chronic disease will increase by 17% between 2005 and 2015.  
 
Chronic diseases  
Cardiovascular diseases, mainly heart disease and  chronic respiratory diseases;  
Stroke;  diabetes;  
Cancer; genetic disorders.  
others, such as mental disorders, vision and hearing  
impairment, oral diseases, bone and joint disorders,  
 
HEART DISEASE  
There are many forms of heart disease. Coronary heart disease, also known as coronary artery 
disease or isch aemic heart disease, is the leading cause of death globally. It is caused by 
disease of the blood vessels (atherosclerosis) of the heart.  
 
STROKE  
Stroke is a disease of the brain caused by interference to the blood supply. Stroke and heart 
disease are the  main cardiovascular diseases.  
 
CANCER  
Cancer describes a range of diseases in which abnormal cells proliferate and spread out of 
control. Other terms used are tumours and neoplasms. There are many types of cancer and all 
organs of the body can become canc erous.  
 
CHRONIC RESPIRATORY DISEASES  
Diseases of the lung take many forms. Chronic obstructive respiratory disease and asthma are 
the most common forms.  
Chronic obstructive respiratory disease is caused by irreversible obstruction of the larger 
airways in  the lung; asthma is caused by reversible obstruction of the smaller airways in the 
lung.  
 
DIABETES  
Diabetes is characterized by raised blood glucose (sugar) levels. This results from a lack of the 
hormone insulin, which controls blood glucose levels, and/ or an inability of the body’s tissues 
to respond properly to insulin. The most common type of diabetes is type 2, which accounts for 
about 90% of all diabetes and is largely the result of excessive weight and physical inactivity. 
The usual childhood form o f diabetes (type 1 diabetes) is caused by an absolute lack of insulin. 
Without insulin, type 1 diabetes is rapidly fatal.  
 
WHAT CAUSES CHRONIC DISEASES?  
The causes (risk factors) of chronic diseases are well established and well known; a small set 
of commo n risk factors are responsible for most of the main chronic diseases. These risk 
factors are modifiable and the same in men and women:  
unhealthy diet;  
physical inactivity;  
tobacco use.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 110 - 
 These causes are expressed through the intermediate risk factors of raised blood pressure, 
raised glucose levels, abnormal blood lipids, overweight and obesity. The major modifiable 
risk factors, in conjunction with the non -modifiable risk factors of age and heredity, explain the 
majority of new events of heart disease, st roke, chronic respiratory diseases and some 
important cancers. The relationship between the major modifiable risk factors and the main 
chronic diseases is similar in all regions of the world.  
 
 
OTHER RISK FACTORS  
Many more risk factors for chronic disease s have been identified, but they account for a 
smaller proportion of disease. Harmful alcohol use is an important contributor to the global 
burden of disease but its relationship to chronic disease is more complex. Other risk factors for 
chronic disease in clude infectious agents that are responsible for cervical and liver cancers, and 
some environmental factors, such as  air pollution, which contribute to a range of chronic 
diseases including asthma and other chronic respiratory diseases.  
 
PSYCHOSOCIAL AND GENETIC FACTORS ALSO PLAY A ROLE.  
Childhood risk  
There is now extensive evidence from many countries that conditions before birth and in 
early childhood influence health in adult life. For example, low birth weight is now known 
to be associated with increa sed rates of high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke and 
diabetes.  
Risk accumulation  
Ageing is an important marker of the accumulation of modifiable risks for chronic disease: 
the impact of risk factors increases over the life course.  
Underlying determi nants  
The underlying determinants of chronic diseases are a reflection of the major forces driving 
social, economic and cultural change – globalization, urbanization, population ageing, and 
the general policy environment.  
Poverty  
Chronic diseases and pover ty are interconnected in a vicious circle. At the same time, 
poverty and worsening of already existing poverty are caused by chronic diseases. The 
poor are more vulnerable for several reasons, including greater exposure to risks and 
decreased access to hea lth services.  
Psychosocial stress also plays a role.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 111 - 
 
 
 
 
INFECTIOUS AND NON -INFECTIOUS CAUSES  
 
Infectious diseases (Communicable diseases) : - are diseases which spread from an infected 
person to a healthy person through air, water, food, vectors, physical  contact or sexual contact. 
Eg : - common cold, chicken pox, mumps, measles, typhoid, cholera, tuberculosis, malaria, 
AIDS etc.  
 
Non-infectious diseases (Non -communicable diseases) : - are diseases which are not spread 
from an infected person to a healthy p erson. Eg : - beri beri, rickets, scurvy, night blindness, 
diabetes, cancer, high blood pressure etc. 5) Causes of diseases : - Diseases are caused by : - i ) 
Pathogens like virus, bacteria, fungi, protozoans or worms. ii) Poor health and under 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 112 - 
 nourishment. ii i) Malfunctioning of body parts. iv) Environmental pollution. v) Genetic 
disorders.  
 
INFECTIOUS AGENTS  
 
Infectious diseases are caused by microorganisms such as viruses, bacteria, fungi or parasites 
and can spread between individuals.  
 
Microorganisms that  cause disease are collectively called pathogens.  
Pathogens cause disease either by disrupting the bodies normal processes and/or stimulating 
the immune system to produce a defensive response, resulting in high fever, inflammation and 
other symptoms.  
Infec tious diseases can be spread from one person to another, for example through contact with 
bodily fluids, by aerosols (through coughing and sneezing), or via a vector, for example a 
mosquito.  
 
Infectious diseases can be caused by:  
Bacteria.  T h e s e  o n e -cell o rganisms are responsible for illnesses such as strep throat, 
urinary tract infections and tuberculosis.  
Viruses.  Even smaller than bacteria, viruses cause a multitude of diseases — ranging 
from the common cold to AIDS.  
Fungi.  Many skin diseases, such as ri ngworm and athlete's foot, are caused by fungi. 
Other types of fungi can infect your lungs or nervous system.  
Parasites.  Malaria is caused by a tiny parasite that is transmitted by a mosquito bite. 
Other parasites may be transmitted to humans from animal f eces.  
 
 
 
MEANS OF SPREAD  
 
Infectious diseases spread from an infected person to a healthy person through air, water, food, 
vectors, physical contact and sexual contact.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 113 - 
 i) Through air : - Common cold, Tuberculosis, Pneumonia etc.  
ii) Through water : - Cho lera, Amoebic dysentry etc.  
iii) Through vectors : - Mosquitoes : - Malaria, Dengue, Yellow fever etc. Flies : - Typhoid, 
Tuberculosis, Diarrhoea, Dysentry etc.  
iv) Through sexual contact : - Syphilis, AIDS. AIDS virus can also spread though blood 
transfusio n and from the mother to her child during pregnancy and through breast feeding.  
 
The below figure shows how Air -transmitted diseases are easier to catch the closer we are to 
the infected person. However, in closed areas, the droplet nuclei recirculate and pose a risk to 
everybody. Overcrowded and poorly ventilated housing is therefore a major factor in the 
spread of airborne diseases.  
 
 
 
Disease can also be spread through water. This occurs if the excreta from someone suffering 
from an infectious gut gets mixed with water. Eg cholera, gets mixed with the drinking water 
used by people living near by. The cholera causing microbes will enter new hosts through the 
water they drink and cause disease in them. Such diseases are much more likely to spread in 
the ab sence of safe supplies of drinking water.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 114 - 
  
The sexual act is one of the closest physical contacts two people can have with each other. Not 
surprisingly, there are microbial diseases such as syphills or AIDS that are transmitted by sexual 
contact from one  partner to the other. However, such sexually transmitted diseases are not spread 
by casual physical contact. Casual physical contacts include handshakes or hugs or sports, like 
wrestling, or by any of the other ways in which we touch each other socially. Other than the sexual 
contact, the AIDS virus can also spread through blood to blood contact with infected people or 
from an infected mother to her baby during pregnancy or through breast feeding.  
 
ORGAN -SPECIFIC AND TISSUESPECIFIC MANIFESTATIONS  
 
Disease causing microbes enter the body by different means and goes to different organs and 
tissues.  
Microbes which enters through the nose are likely to go to the lungs. ( Bacteria which 
cause tuberculosis of lungs).  
Microbes which enter through the mouth are l ikely to stay in the gut ( Bacteria which 
causes Typhoid) or liver (Bacteria which causes Jaundice).  
Virus which causes AIDS enter the body through sexual organs during sexual contact and 
spreads through the lymph to all parts of the body and damages the immune system.  
Malaria -causing microbes, entering through a mosquito bite, will go to the liver, and then 
to the red blood cells.  
The virus causing Japanese encephalitis, or brain fever, will similarly enter through a 
mosquito bite goes and infects the b rain. 
 
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT  
 
The treatment of infectious diseases consists of two steps. They are to reduce the effects of the 
disease (symptoms) and to kill the microbes which caused the disease.  
i) To reduce the effects of the disease : - This can be done by taking medicines to bring down 
the effects of the disease like fever, pain or loose motions etc. and by taking bed rest to 
conserve our energy.  
ii) To kill the microbes : - This can be done by taking suitable antibiotics and drugs which kills 
the m icrobes and the disease is cured.  
 
PRINCIPLES OF PREVENTION  
There are two ways of prevention of infectious diseases. They are general ways and specific 
ways.  
i) General ways of prevention : - Public hygiene is most important for prevention of infectious 
diseases. Proper and sufficient food for every one will make people healthy to resist infection. 
Air borne diseases can be prevented by living in conditions that are not crowded. Water borne 
diseases can be prevented by providing safe drinking water. Vector borne diseases can be 
prevented by providing clean environment.  
ii) Specific ways of prevention : - The specific ways to prevent infectious disease is 
immunisation by taking vaccines. Vaccines provide immunity from infectious diseases like 
tetanus, diphthe ria, whooping cough, measles, polio etc. Our body has an immune system 
which fights microbial infection. When this system first sees an infectious microbe, it kills the 
microbe and remembers it. So if the microbe enters the body the next time, it responds more 
vigorously. Vaccines mimic the infectious microbe and strengthens our immune system and 
protects the body from infectious diseases.  
 
IMMUNISATION  
 
Immunisation gives a very good level of protection against many serious diseases.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 115 - 
 It uses your body's na tural defence mechanism, the immune response, to build resistance to 
specific infection.  
There are three reasons why we immunise children.  
First, immunisation prevents children from becoming ill with unpleasant and serious 
infectious diseases, which have a risk of complications and long -term side effects.  
Second,  we immunise to try and help protect all children in the population.  The more 
people who are immunised, the less of the infectious disease there is around so the less 
chance there is of anyone ca tching it.  When levels of immunisation against an infectious 
disease are really, really high - then something happens called 'herd immunity' where the 
risk of the disease occurring is so low that even those who cannot be immunised are 
unlikely to be affec ted.  
Third, we immunise to try and wipe out as many infectious diseases as we can everywhere 
in the world.  
 
 
 
 
 
SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES  
 
CAUSES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES (INFECTIOUS AGENTS)  
 
VIRUSES  
 
Viral diseases are extremely widespread infections caused by  viruses, a type of microorganism. 
There are many types of viruses that cause a wide variety of viral diseases. The most common 
type of viral disease is the common cold, which is caused by a viral infection of the upper 
respiratory tract (nose and throat).  Other common viral diseases include:  
Chickenpox  
Flu (influenza)  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 116 - 
 Herpes  
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV/AIDS)  
Human papillomavirus (HPV)  
Infectious mononucleosis  
Mumps, measles and rubella  
Shingles  
Viral gastroenteritis (stomach flu)  
Viral hepatitis  
Viral meningitis  
Viral pneumonia  
 
Viral diseases are contagious and spread from person to person when a virus enters the body 
and begins to multiply. Common ways that viruses spread from person to person include:  
Breathing in air -borne droplets contaminated wi th a virus  
Eating food or drinking water contaminated with a virus  
Having sexual contact with a person who is infected with a sexually transmitted virus  
Indirect transmission from person to person by a virus host, such as a mosquito, tick, or 
field mouse  
Touching surfaces or body fluids contaminated with a virus  
 
Viral diseases result in a wide variety of symptoms that vary in character and severity 
depending on the type of viral infection and other factors, including the person’s age and 
overall health. Co mmon symptoms of viral diseases include flu -like symptoms and malaise.  
Viral diseases are not treatable with antibiotics, which can only cure bacterial diseases and 
infections. However, the most common viral diseases, the common cold and the flu, are self -
limiting in generally healthy people. This means that the viral infection causes illness for a 
period of time, then it resolves and symptoms disappear as your immune system attacks the 
virus and your body recovers.  
 
In some cases, viral diseases can lead t o serious, possibly life -threatening complications, such 
as dehydration, bacterial pneumonia, and other secondary bacterial infections. People at risk 
for complications include those who have a chronic disease or a suppressed or compromised 
immune system, and the very young and very old. In addition, certain types of sexually 
transmitted viral infections, such as HIV/AIDS and HPV, can lead to serious complications and 
death. Seek prompt medical care if you think you have a viral disease, especially if you a re at 
risk for complications, or if you believe you have been exposed to a sexually transmitted 
disease.  
Seek immediate medical care if you, or someone you are with, have serious symptoms of an 
illness or a viral disease, such as shortness of breath, chest  pain, passing out (fainting), or a 
change in alertness or consciousness.  
 
SYMPTOMS OF VIRAL DISEASES  
Symptoms of viral diseases vary depending on the specific type of virus causing infection, the 
area of the body that is infected, the age and health histo ry of the patient, and other factors. The 
symptoms of viral diseases can affect almost any area of the body or body system. Symptoms 
of viral diseases can include:  
Flu-like symptoms (fatigue, fever, sore throat, headache, cough, aches and pains)  
Gastrointe stinal disturbances, such as diarrhea, nausea and vomiting  
Irritability  
Malaise (general ill feeling)  
Rash  
Sneezing  
Stuffy nose, nasal congestion, runny nose, or postnasal drip  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 117 - 
 Swollen lymph nodes  
Swollen tonsils  
Unexplained weight loss  
 
In infants, signs of a viral disease can also include:  
Bulging of the soft spot on the top of the head  
Difficulty with feeding  
Excessive crying or fussiness  
Excessive sleepiness  
 
Serious symptoms that might indicate a life -threatening condition  
In some cases, viral diseases  can result in serious complications, such as dehydration or 
pneumonia. Seek immediate medical care (call 911) if you, or someone you are with, have any 
of the following symptoms:  
Change in alertness or level of consciousness  
Chest pain  
Deep, wet chest cou gh that produces yellow, green or brownish phlegm  
High fever (higher than 101 degrees Fahrenheit)  
Lethargy or unresponsiveness  
Seizure  
Shortness of breath, wheezing, or difficulty breathing  
Stiff neck  
Yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice)  
 
WHAT CAUSES VIRAL DISEASES?  
Viral infections occur when a virus enters the body and invades the inside of the body’s cells in 
order to reproduce. If the body’s immune system is unable to fight off the virus, it multiplies 
and spreads to other cells, repe ating the process and leading to a widespread infection.  
 
Types of viruses  
There are many types of viruses that cause a wide variety of viral infections or viral diseases. 
In fact, there are more than 200 different viruses that can cause a cold or an upper  respiratory 
infection. Other common viruses include the following:  
Epstein -Barr virus causes infectious mononucleosis (cytomegalovirus causes a very 
similar disease in some people).  
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) causes AIDS.  
Human papillomaviruses (H PV) cause HPV infection, cervical dysplasia, genital warts, 
and cervical cancer.  
Influenza viruses, such as H1N1, cause influenza (flu).  
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) causes lower respiratory tract infections in young 
children.  
Rhinoviruses cause the c ommon cold.  
Rotavirus, enteroviruses and noroviruses cause viral gastroenteritis.  
Varicella zoster virus causes shingles and chickenpox.  
West Nile virus causes West Nile fever.  
 
Various ways to become infected with a virus  
Our body infected with a virus in  a variety of ways including:  
Being bitten by an animal infected with a virus  
Being bitten by an insect infected with a virus, such as with West Nile virus  
Breathing in air -borne droplets contaminated with a virus  
Eating food or drinking water contaminated  with a virus  
Having sexual contact with a person who is infected with a sexually transmitted virus  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 118 - 
 Sharing needles for tattooing or drug use with an infected person  
Touching infected feces or body fluids and not washing your hands before eating or 
touchin g your mouth, eyes or nose  
Touching surfaces contaminated with a virus  
Transmission of a virus from an infected mother to her baby during pregnancy or 
delivery  
 
 
 
What are the risk factors for contracting viral diseases?  
Viral diseases can occur in any ag e group or population. Everybody contracts viral diseases 
during their life, although in some cases, the virus does not cause obvious symptoms. Risk 
factors for catching a viral disease or developing complications of a viral disease include:  
Advanced age  
Compromised immune system due to an immunodeficiency disorder, HIV/AIDS, 
cancer or cancer treatment, kidney disease, or other condition  
History of chronic disease, such as asthma, COPD, diabetes, tuberculosis, or heart 
disease  
Malnourishment  
Not getting eno ugh rest and having high levels of stress  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 119 - 
 Not washing your hands frequently, especially before eating or after using the restroom, 
or after touching common surfaces  
Sharing needles to inject drugs or for tattooing  
Unprotected sex including vaginal, oral an d anal sex with a partner who has had one or 
more other sexual partners  
Young age including infancy and elementary -school -age children  
 
Reducing your risk of viral diseases  
We can lower your risk of catching or spreading a viral disease by:  
Abstaining from  sexual activity, or only engaging in sexual activities within a mutually 
monogamous relationship in which neither partner is infected with a sexually 
transmitted disease  
Avoiding contact of your hands with your eyes, nose and mouth, which can transmit a 
virus into the body  
Avoiding contact with a person who has a viral disease  
Covering your mouth and nose with your elbow (not your hand) or a tissue when 
sneezing or coughing  
Eating a well -balanced diet that includes sufficient amounts of fruits and vegetabl es 
Sufficient rest  
Using a new condom for each sex act  
Using a sterile, unused needle for each act of tattooing or injectable drug use  
Using appropriate antibacterial cleaners to clean your hands and surfaces  
Vaccination as recommended by your health care provider for viral diseases, such as 
chickenpox, shingles, influenza, HPV, hepatitis B, hepatitis A, measles, and mumps  
Washing your hands with soap and water for at least 15 seconds after contact with a 
person who has a viral disease, before eating, or af ter using the restroom or touching 
feces, body fluids, surfaces, or foods that are potentially contaminated with viruses  
 
How are viral diseases treated?  
Treatment of viral infections varies depending on the specific virus and other factors. General 
treatm ent measures are aimed at relieving your symptoms so that you can get the rest you need 
to keep up your strength and recover without developing complications.  
General treatments for viral infections include:  
Acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Ad vil) for fever, body aches, and pain  
Drinking extra fluids  
Getting extra rest and sleep  
Maintaining good nutrition  
 
Depending on the type of viral infection and the presence of complications, a wide variety of 
other treatments may be needed. For example, a  human papillomavirus (HPV) infection that 
leads to cervical dysplasia can be treated by surgical removal of the abnormal cells on a 
woman’s cervix.    
In general, it is recommended that children younger than age six not use cold or cough 
medications becau se of the risk for serious side effects. In addition, people with a viral disease 
should not use aspirin or products that contain aspirin because of the risk of developing a rare 
but life -threatening condition called Reye syndrome. Reye syndrome has been l inked to taking 
aspirin during a viral illness, such as a cold or the flu.  
Prescription medications used to treat viral diseases  
 
In some cases, certain medications may be prescribed to treat viral diseases:  
Antiretroviral medications, which can help peopl e with HIV/AIDS lead longer lives. 
Antiretroviral medications hinder the ability of HIV to reproduce, which slows the 
spread of HIV in the body.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 120 - 
 Antiviral drugs, which minimize the severity and length of some viral infections, such 
as the flu and shingles,  especially in people who are at a high risk for serious 
complications. For example, the drugs oseltamivir (brand name Tamiflu) and zanamivir 
(brand name Relenza) may be prescribed for some cases of flu. These drugs are not 
appropriate for all people with the flu.  
 
Antibiotics, which are not prescribed for viral diseases because they are ineffective in the 
treatment of viral infections, may be prescribed if a person with a viral disease develops a 
secondary bacterial infection, such as bacterial pneumonia, bacterial bronchitis, or encephalitis.  
 
Complementary treatments  
Complementary and traditional treatments will not cure a viral disease but may help to increase 
comfort, promote rest, and minimize symptoms of viral diseases. Some possible treatments 
includ e: 
Chicken soup to help break up congestion and provide easy -to-digest nutrients and 
extra fluids to help keep up strength  
Supplements or products that contain vitamin C, echinacea, or zinc  
Using a vaporizer  
Using mentholated ointments on the chest  
 
What a re the possible complications of viral diseases?  
In some people, viral diseases can break down the body’s defenses and lead to more serious 
infections and life -threatening complications. Therefore, it is important to visit your health care 
provider when yo u have symptoms of a viral infection. Once the underlying infection has been 
determined, following the treatment plan outlined by your health care provider can help reduce 
any potential complications including:  
Acute bronchitis  
Cervical cancer (from human papillomavirus infection)  
Dehydration  
Frequent life -threatening, opportunistic infections  
Otitis media (ear infection)  
Pneumonia  
Secondary bacterial infection  
Seizures  
Shock and coma  
Sinusitis  
Worsening of asthma  
 
BACTERIA  
Bacteria are single -celled microo rganisms.  
They come in many shapes including ball -, rod - and spiral -shaped.  
Most bacteria are not harmful and some are actually beneficial. Less than one per cent of 
bacteria will actually make you ill.  
Infectious bacteria can grow, divide and spread in th e body, leading to infectious disease.  
Some infectious bacteria give off toxins which can make some diseases more severe.  
Bacteria are spread in many ways including:  
Spread by aerosols (through coughing and sneezing). For example, Streptococcus.  
Spread by surface and skin contact. For example, Staphylococcus aureus, including 
MRSA.  
Spread through body fluids, such as blood and saliva. For example, meningococcal 
disease (meningitis).  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 121 - 
 
 
 
Antibiotics are usually given to treat severe bacterial infections.  
Antibiotic resistance in bacteria is a significant problem.  
 
TYPHOID (ENTERIC FEVER)  
• Typhoid is a common bacterial disease caused by a rodlike bacterium. Salmonella typhi, 
which is commonly found in the intestine of man.  
• Certain humans function as carriers  without suffering from it. Mary Mallon, called Typhoid 
Mary was such a case. She was a cook and typhoid carrier, who continued to spread the disease 
for several years through her food preparation.  
 
Mode of transmission of Typhoid  
• Incubation period varie s from 1 -3 weeks, average 2 weeks.  
• Typhoid spreads through food and water contaminated with faeces of the patient. House flies 
may carry the pathogens from the faeces to the food, milk and water.  
Symptoms of Typhoid  
• This disease is characterised by the  inflammation of ileum and colon, liver and spleen also 
become enlarged, abdominal pain, pea -soup diarrhoea which may become haemorrhagic, 
constant fever, extreme weakness, vomiting, rash of rose coloured spots called rose spots on 
the upper abdomen and so re throat.  
• Typhoid is diagnosed by Widal Test.  
 
Prevention and treatment Typhoid  
• Any patient with typhoid requires the highest standards of nursing together with isolation and 
hygienic disposal of faeces.  
• The two most important preventive measures ar e proper sewage treatment and purification of 
water supplies.  
• Contamination of food can be reduced by personal hygiene and control of flies.  
• TAB vaccine provides immunity for about 3 years.  
• Antibiotics like ampicillin and chloramphenicol are used to treat typhoid.  
 
CHOLERA  
• Cholera commonly called haiza is a water -borne disease caused by the bacterium, Vibrio 
cholerae.  
• Robert Koch discovered this disease.  
 
Mode of transmission of Cholera  
• Incubation period varies from a few hours to 2 -3 days.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 122 - 
 • It spreads through contaminated food and drinks.  
• The causative bacterium secretes cholera toxin, enterotoxin which induces excessive 
secretion of an isotonic electrolyte solution by the intestinal mucosa. This solution is lost in 
stool.  
 
Symptoms of Choler a 
• Cholera is mainly characterized by sudden onset of profuse, effortless, rice -water like stools, 
vomiting and rapid dehydration, loss of minerals and muscular cramps.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Cholera  
• Proper sanitation and hygienic conditions are t he best methods of prevention.  
• Cholera vaccine is effective for six months only.  
• Fluid and salt lost is restored by Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS). It is water with a small 
amount of sugar and salt.  
• Antibiotics like tetracycline and chloramphenicol are used to treat cholera.  
 
DIARRHOEAL DISEASES  
• Diarrhoeal diseases are group of diseases caused by different bacteria such as Shigella 
dysenteriae, Escherichia coli, Campylobacter, Salmonella and Clostridium.  
 
Mode of transmission of Diarrhoeal diseases  
• Incubation period is variable.  
• Epidemics are common in overcrowded insanitary conditions.  
• It spreads through food poisoning, contaminated food, water or drinks, clothes, utensils and 
bed sheets.  
 
Symptoms of Diarrhoeal diseases  
• This is characteris ed by mild diarrhoea i.e., loose stools if infected by E. coli, frequent stools 
with blood and mucus and abdominal cramps if infected by Shigella. Other symptoms are 
dehydration, diminished appetite, fever, low B.P., increase in pulse rate etc.  
 
Prevention  and treatment of Diarrhoeal diseases  
• One should avoid contaminated food and water.  
• ORS is given repeatedly to check dehydration and loss of minerals.  
 
PNEUMONIA   
• Pneumonia is a serious disease of lungs characterised by accumulation of mucus/fluid in  
alveoli and bronchioles to that extent that breathing becomes difficult.  
• It is caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae or Diplococcus pneumoniae, and Haemophilus 
influenzae.  
 
Mode of transmission of Pneumonia  
• Incubation period is of 1 -3 days.  
• A healthy person acquires the infection by inhaling the droplets/aerosols released by an 
infected person or even by sharing glasses and utensils with an infected person.  
 
Symptoms  
• The onset of pneumonia is usually sudden with a single shaking chill, followed by fe ver, pain 
with breathing on the side of lung involved, increased pulse and respiratory rates and cough.  
• In severe cases the lips and finger nails turn grey to bluish in colour.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Pneumonia  
• The patients should be isolated and healthy persons should not share their belongings.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 123 - 
 • Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) is available.  
• Drugs against pneumonia are erythromycin, tetracycline and sulphonamide. If untreated, 
pneumonia leads to death.  
 
DIPHTHERIA  
• Diphtheria is an acut e infectious disease in children mostly characterized by the development 
of a grey adherent false membrane over the upper respiratory tract or throat.  
• It is caused by toxigenic strains of Corynebacterium diphtheriae (rod shaped, Gram +ve 
bacterium).  
 
Mod e of transmission of Diphtheria  
• Incubation period is of 2 - 5 days.  
• Endotoxin produced by pathogen causes nasal diphtheria, pharyngeal diphtheria and 
laryngotracheal diphtheria.  
• The germs are present in the discharges from the nose and throat of patie nts and also of 
healthy people who act as the “carriers”.  
• The patients and the carriers spread the disease through acts like kissing, talking, coughing 
and sneezing.  
 
Symptoms of Diphtheria  
• Symptoms are fever, sore throat, sometimes vomiting, headache,  epithelial necrosis by 
endotoxin and oozing of semisolid material in the throat which develops into a grey false but 
tough membrane.  
• The membrane chokes the air passage. Sometimes, bacterium infects the heart, nerve cells 
and adrenal glands.  
• In severe  cases, respiratory tract is blocked causing difficulty in breathing and even death due 
to choking.  
• ‘Schick test’ tests the presence of antitoxin and the state of hypersensitivity to diphtheria 
toxin.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Diphtheria  
• One should avoid close contact with the patient.  
• DPT (diphtheria, pertussis and tetanus) vaccine is available.  
• Erythromycin is used to treat diphtheria.  
 
WHOOPING COUGH (PERTUSSIS)  
• Whooping cough is caused by Bordetella pertussis and is a common childhood disea se 
affecting the respiratory system.  
 
Mode of transmission  
• It has an incubation period of 10 – 16 days.  
• It spreads by droplet infection or by direct contact.  
 
Symptoms of Whooping cough (Pertussis)  
• It causes loss of appetite, fever, running nose, fat igue, sneezing and constant cough leaving 
the child breathless, tired and red in face.  
• Later the voice becomes hoarse and the cough gives a whoop or a loud crowing sound while 
inhaling.  
• The child usually vomits and there is frothy discharge from his mo uth and nose.  
• There may be other complications like vomiting, convulsions and pneumonia.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Whooping cough (Pertussis)  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 124 - 
 • Immunisation of the disease is done in infants by DPT vaccination at six weeks, three months 
and five month s. 
• Erythromycin antibiotic is used for the treatment.  
 
TUBERCULOSIS  
• Tuberculosis (TB), also called Koch’s disease is caused by rod -shaped, Gram +ve bacteria, 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.  
• The bacterium releases a toxin, tuberculin which destroys the or gans it infects.  
• It can affect almost any tissue or organ in the body like the lungs, lymph nodes, brain, bones 
and joints but disease of the lung is by far the most frequent.  
 
Mode of transmission of Tuberculosis  
• Incubation period is 3 to 6 weeks or m ay be years.  
• It spreads through sneezing, coughing, contaminated food and water.  
 
Symptoms of Tuberculosis  
• Constant cough and in severe cases sputum with blood, pain in chest while coughing, loss of 
body weight, failure of appetite, slight rise of temp erature in the evening are the symptoms of 
lung T. B.  
• Sputum, tuberculin, X -ray and gastric analysis are carried out to diagnose tuberculosis.  
• Tuberculin test is also called Mantoux test.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Tuberculosis  
• BCG (Bacillus Calmet te Guerin) vaccine for TB was obtained from bovine bacillus by 
Calmette and Guerin in 1921.  
• Before giving vaccination to any individual it is important to check if they are already 
suffering from TB or have recovered from it.  
• The test is to puncture th e skin with a special instrument which has a ring of six short needles 
(the Heaf test). This introduces tuberculin, purified from dead tubercle bacilli.  
• In the absence of past or present TB the skin shows no reaction, but if an individual has the 
disease  or has recovered, then the skin swells and reddens at the injection site. This indicates a 
substantial immunity and no vaccine is offered.  
• Some of the anti -tuberculosis drugs are streptomycin, rifampicin, isoniazid, thiatazone, PAS 
(Para amino salicydic  acid) etc.  
• Direct observation treatment (DOT) is a programme under WHO for treatment of TB across 
the world.  
 
ANTHRAX (BIOWAR DISEASE)  
• Anthrax is an acute infectious disease caused by airborne, spore -forming, rod -like, non -
motile bacterium, Bacillus a nthracis.  
• Bacillus anthracis can be easily grown in the laboratory. Anthrax spores can be produced in a 
dry form which can be stored as particles.  
• These particles can be used in biological warfare. Spores are infective in dry form, not in wet 
form.  
• It most commonly occurs in wild and domestic vertebrates (cattle, sheep, goats, camels, 
antelopes, and other herbivores), but it can also occur in humans when they are exposed to 
infected animals or tissues from infected animals.  
 
Mode of transmission of An thrax (Biowar disease)  
• Infected animals shed, a large number of bacilli (bacteria) in the discharges from the mouth, 
nose and rectum which sporulate in the soil. These spores are source of infection.  
• It requires thousands of spores to cause human infec tion. Anthrax does not spread from 
human to human.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 125 - 
  
Types of Anthrax of Anthrax (Biowar disease)  
• Anthrax infection can occur in three different forms: cutaneous (skin), gastrointestinal (by 
ingestion) and pulmonary (by inhalation).  
(i) Cutaneous anthrax occurs when bacteria enter through skin cuts and wounds. A skin lesion 
begins as a papule and soon becomes a vesicle and breaks, discharging bloody serum. This 
vesicle, in about 36 hours, becomes a bluish -black necrotic mass (dead tissue). It consists of 
minute particles rich in spores.  
(ii) Gastrointestinal anthrax is caused by taking under - cooked meat of infected animals. 
Patient experiences chill, high fever, body aches, nausea, vomiting, bloody diarrhoea, loss of 
appetite, and frequent haemorrhages fro m the mucous membranes and in the skin.  
(iii) Pulmonary anthrax is acquired by inhaling dust containing B. anthracis. Pulmonary 
anthrax is often called wool -sorter’s disease.  
 
Symptoms of Anthrax (Biowar disease)  
• Initial symptoms resemble those of common  cold. Later there is difficulty in breathing, 
cough, fever, fast pulse and cardiovascular collapse.  
• If left untreated, anthrax in all forms can lead to septicemia and death.  
• Death is apparently due to oxygen depletion, secondary shock, increased vascu lar 
permeability, respiratory failure and cardiac failure.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Anthrax (Biowar disease)  
• The only known effective prevention against anthrax is the anthrax vaccine. The vaccine was 
developed from an attenuated strain B. anthracis.  
• A suitable antibiotic like ciprofloxacin is quite effective, particularly if used in the initial 
stages of disease. But in cattle, ciprofloxacin may be effective only in chronic area.  
• Antibiotics should be given to unvaccinated individuals exposed to pulmonary anthrax. 
Penicillin, tetracycline and fluoroquinolones are effective if administered before the onset of 
lymphatic spread or septicemia.  
 
TETANUS (LOCK JAW)  
• Lock jaw disease is caused by the spores of Clostridium tetani that enter through wound s. 
 
Mode of transmission  
• Incubation period is of 3 -25 days during which the bacterium secretes a powerful exotoxin 
tenanospasmin into the tissue, and blood carries it to the central nervous system and brings 
about tetanus of muscles.  
• Its infection is a cquired by contamination of wounds with tetanus spores as these infected 
spores are abundant in the soil manured with animal dung.  
• Spores may survive for 60 or more years in contaminated soil.  
 
Symptoms of Tetanus (Lock jaw)  
• Symptoms include painful mu scular spasms especially of neck and jaw.  
• Lock jaw condition occurs when the patient cannot open the mouth. Convulsions and 
paralysis of muscles, difficulty in chewing and swallowing, fever and headache are the other 
symptoms.  
Prevention and treatment  
• All wounds should be treated carefully and cleaned with iodine solution.  
• Immunisation of infants by DPT should be done.  
• ATS {antitetanus serum) injection within 24 hours of injury provides passive immunity while 
TT (tetanus toxoid) gives active immunit y. 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 126 - 
 PLAGUE (BLACK DEATH)   
• Plague is caused by a rod -shaped non -motile bacterium called Pasteurella/Yersinia pestis and 
is transmitted by the bite of infected rat flea, Xenopsylla cheopis.  
• The first authenticated plague epidemics in India in modern tim es occurred in 1895 -96 and 
from 1898 onwards the disease was appreciably manifest, reaching a peak in the year 1907.  
• Pasteurella pestis endoparasite of gut of rat flea (which is an ectoparasite of rat and mouse).  
• Head louse (Pediculus) and bedbug (Cime x) may also transmit the germs from man to man.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Plague (Black death)  
• Plague is confirmed by Wayson stain test.  
• Anti -plague vaccine, spray of insecticides, killing of rats, nose caps and high cots (rat flea can 
jump upto 45 cm) are some preventive measures.  
• Streptomycin or oral tetracycline is effective against plague.  
 
LEPROSY (HANSEN’S DISEASE)  
• Leprosy is a contagious chronic bacterial disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae which is 
characterised by the chronic infectio n of the skin and other tissues.  
 
Mode of transmission of Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)  
• The incubation period is very long and averages upto 2 -5 years.  
• Infection occurs by prolonged contact with leprosy patients.  
• The bacilli leave the body in nasal disc harge, from the throat during coughing, sneezing and 
even speaking and through broken skin lesions.  
 
Symptoms of Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)  
These include appearance of light coloured patches on the skin, thickening of the nerves, 
partial or total loss of s ensation in the affected parts of the body.  
• These are accompanied by fever, pain, ulcers and skin eruptions. Deformities of toes and 
fingers may also develop.  
Lepromin test is used to evaluate leprosy using an intradermal injection of a lepromin. This te st 
classifies the type of leprosy based on reaction.  
• Tuberculoid leprosy gives positive test with lepromin while lepromatous leprosy is negative 
to lepromin test.  
 
Prevention and treatment of Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)  
• No vaccine is available.  
• Lepros y is treated with drugs like rifampicin, dapsone, and clofazimine.  
 
FUNGI  
Fungi are microorganisms characterised by cell walls made from a substance called chitin.  
Most fungi are harmless to humans and some are edible.  
Other fungi can be infectious and may  lead to life -threatening diseases.  
Fungi reproduce by releasing spores that can be picked up by direct contact or even inhaled.  
Fungal infections often affect the lungs, skin or nails. Some infections may also penetrate the 
body to affect organs and cause  whole -body infections.  
Examples of fungal infections include:  
Athlete’s foot: itching, scaling or cracking of the skin  
Ringworm: reddish, itchy, scaly rash usually on the skin and scalp  
Thrush: caused by the fungus Candida albicans which can infect the mo uth, vagina, 
stomach and urinary tract.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 127 - 
 Fungi that commonly cause skin diseases are called dermatophytes. “Dermatophytes” doesn't 
refer to a particular group of fungi, but rather to the fact that they attack the dermis, or skin. 
Fungal infections of the s kin can be treated with topical creams as well as prescription drugs.  
 
Athlete's Foot  
The best -known fungal skin infection is athlete's foot. It infects approximately 10 percent of 
the United States population. It is most common among adolescents and adult s; however, it 
may affect people of any age.  
 
Athlete's foot can grow on the feet in different forms, including the following:  
Interdigital:  Infection occurs between the toes, with scaling, fissuring, or softened skin.  
Moccasin: The fungi grows as a thick scaling over the entire sole of the foot (like a moccasin) 
and causes discomfort.  
Vesicular: The fungi appear as small, itchy blisters near the instep.  
Ulcerative:  The infection involves peeling, oozing discharge, and a strong odor that usually 
starts as r ed, itchy swelling between the toes.  
 
A good way to combat athlete's foot is to keep feet clean and dry. Topical powders or creams 
may also help to control infection. Unfortunately, athlete's foot is tough to eliminate and often 
comes back.  
 
 
 
Scalp Itch  
Scalp itch is a fungal infection of the scalp and hair. It usually occurs in young children, but 
may appear in all age groups. It is contagious and may be spread from child to child in a school 
or day care setting.  
 
An antifungal drug called riseofulvin cu res scalp itch in one to three months.  
 
Nail Fungus  
Nail fungus is most common in adolescents and adults, especially among people who have 
frequent manicures. These infections can manifest themselves in a variety of patterns. 
Sometimes a portion of the nai l becomes thick and brittle. Other times, the fungi attack the 
cuticle and the growth spreads out from there. This cuticle -based infection is common in AIDS 
patients.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 128 - 
  
PARASITES  
A parasite is an organism that lives off another organism, typically attaching  itself to feed from 
the victim’s blood, bowels, or other various bodily fluids. Parasitic diseases are more common 
than most people realize, and can strike anyone regardless of race, age, or social status. A certain  
amount of parasites are normally found on the skin and bedding of every human being. Dust 
mites, and other tiny, harmless mites, are commonly found in all household. Harmful parasites, 
however, can cause a great deal of damage to the human body if not properly treated.  
 
PARASITIC DISEASES SYMP TOMS  
Parasites such as roundworms feed off the human waste in the intestines. Symptoms of various 
worm infestation include itching, usually of the anus or vaginal area, weight loss, increased 
appetite, abdominal pain, bowel obstructions, vomiting, disturbe d sleep, worms present in the 
stools or vomit, diarrhea, anemia, symptoms of pneumonia, food poisoning symptoms, aching 
muscles or joints, or a generally feeling of illness. These symptoms can range from barely 
noticeable to very severe.  
 
PARASITIC DISEASE S CAUSES  
Parasitic disease is typically caused by the parasite’s entry into the body via the skin or mouth. I t 
is not unusual to pick up parasitic infections from soil, typically by either walking barefoot and 
allowing entry through the feet, or by placing  the hands in the dirt and eventually placing the 
fingers in the mouth. Often people carry a parasite without ever knowing it.  
 
 
 
Parasites such as lice are caused through human contact with a person who is infected with lice. 
Ticks can be picked up throu gh walking outdoors, close contact with a dog or cat, or being 
brought in from outside in various packages. Mosquitoes are parasites which simply attack 
humans for their blood and leave as quickly as they came.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 129 - 
 PARASITIC DISEASES RISK FACTOR  
Risk factors for parasites include children who play outdoors in the dirt, close contact with pets, 
farming, gardening, outdoor activities that include walking near wooded areas, digging in the 
dirt, walking outside barefoot, being in close or sexual contact with someo ne who has specific 
parasites, or sometimes simply the act of walking from the car to the house. Parasites exist in the 
world and can not be avoided simply by avoiding being outdoors. Parasites can be found in 
foods, especially undercooked or exotic foods.  
 
Physicians typically do not screen for parasites without cause. Blood tests or fecal samples can 
determine parasites, but not all parasites. Pinworms require a nightly anal test, typically for thre e 
nights, where a sticky slide is placed on either side o f the anus to pick up any eggs that have been 
laid. Analyzing the slide under a microscope can determine the presence of pinworm.  
 
The majority of parasitic diseases are not dangerous. However, extreme cases may cause weight 
loss, dehydration from chronic diarrhea, symptoms which mimic pneumonia, anemia, fatigue, 
Lyme disease from ticks, Malaria from mosquitoes, or a host of uncomfortable bowel 
syndromes.  
 
PARASITIC DISEASES TREATMENT  
Treatment of parasitic disease is typically nothing. Most often there ar e no symptoms, or 
symptoms are so mild that there is no concern, and thus physicians are not told to consider the 
symptoms as a possible parasitic disease. Unless there are serious symptoms or the infestation is 
large enough to cause health problems, most parasitic diseases will clear up on their own.  
 
For serious symptomatic cases, medication can be administered to kill the parasite or to relieve 
the symptoms caused by the parasite. Pinworm discomfort can be handled with an anti itch 
cream, while Lyme dise ase can only be treated by treating the symptoms. Medication such as 
mebendazole, pyrantel pamoate, and albendazole are effective medications in killing worm 
infestations.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 130 - 
 When dealing an infestation of worms or other parasites, self care can be as simple  as keeping 
clean. Frequent bathing, cleaning clothes and bed clothes, wearing clean underclothing to bed, 
and checking for parasites are the best ways to deal with a parasitic disease. Washing hands 
frequently, especially after outdoor activities can help  reduce the chances of a parasitic disease.  
 
PARASITIC DISEASES PREVENTION  
Coping with a parasitic disease can be stressful, more so when the patient believes that parasites 
come from being dirty. Parasites can be contracted regardless of the cleanliness of the home. 
While hand washing and overall cleanliness are positive ways to prevent parasitic infections and 
diseases, they in now way guarantee that parasites won’t infect a family member.  
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 135 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  178  
 
Q1. State any tw o conditions essential for good health.  
Answer:  
Good health of a person depends on  
(i) social environment.  
(ii) public cleanliness.  
(iii) good economic conditions and earnings.  
(iv) social equality and harmony.  
 
Q2. State any two conditions essential for being free of disease.  
Answer:  
The conditions essential for being free of diseases  
(i) Taking good food (balanced diet)  
(ii) Maintaining personal and public hygiene.  
 
Q3. Are the answers to the above questions necessarily the same or different? Why?  
Answe r:  
The answers are not same all the time. Because the meaning of health varies from person to 
person. For example, good health for a dancer may be being able to stretch his body into 
difficult but graceful positions. On the other hand, good health for a m usician may mean 
having enough breathing capacity in his/her lungs to control his/her voice.  
There is one similarity in both the cases. If the conditions essential for good health are 
maintained, then there are no chances of getting a disease.  
 
 
INTEXT QUE STIONS PAGE NO.  180  
 
Q1. List any three reasons why you would think that you are sick and ought to see a 
doctor. If only one of these symptoms were present, would you still go to the doctor? Why 
or why not?  
Answer:  
When there is a disease, its symptoms a nd signs appear. These symptoms may be headache, 
cough, loose -motions, wound with pus, etc. These symptoms indicate disease but do not tell 
what the disease is. So, it is advisable to go to the doctor to diagnose any signs of a disease on 
the basis of thes e symptoms. The doctor will get laboratory tests done, if required for the 
confirmation of a particular disease.  
 
Q2. In which of the following case do you think the long -term effects on your health are 
likely to be most unpleasant?  
If you get jaundice,  
If you get lice,  
If you get acne.  
Why?  
Answer:  
Lice and acne will not cause long lasting effects on our body. But in case of jaundice, there 
will be severe long lasting effects. For example:  
(i) High temperature, headache and joint pains.  
(ii) Feeling of na usea and vomiting.  
(iii) Initiating rashes.  
The patient will suffer from poor health and will recover by taking complete bed rest for 
sometime.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 136 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  187  
 
Q1. Why are we normally advised to take bland and nourishing food when we are s ick? 
Answer:  
In case of illness, the normal functions of the body get disturbed. So, a nourishing food is 
required which is easily digestable and contains all the nutrients. Therefore, bland and 
nourishing food is advised to take during sickness.  
 
Q2. Wha t are the different means by which infectious diseases are spread?  
Answer:  
Infectious diseases spread by different means. These are:  
(i) Through air An infected person when sneezes or coughs releases droplets containing 
germs. These droplets infect anothe r healthy person through air and microbes enter a new 
body. Examples of such diseases are common cold, pneumonia and tuberculosis.  
(ii) Through water If the water source is polluted by the excreta of infectious persons having 
gut diseases and this water is  used by other people they will be infected by diseases. For 
example, cholera, amoebiasis, hepatitis spread through water.  
(iii) Through sexual contact Some diseases like AIDS and syphilis, etc., are transmitted by 
sexual contact. Other than this, AIDS vir us also spread through blood, infected syringes, 
infected mother to her baby during pregnancy and through breast feeding.  
(iv) Through vectors There are some animals which act as intermediaries or vectors for a 
particular diseases. The vectors carry diseas es from infected person to the healthy person. For 
example, mosquito spread malaria causing organism in humans, while sucking their blood.  
 
Q3. What precautions can you take in your school to reduce the incidence of infectious 
diseases?  
Answer:  
To prevent  the incidence of infectious diseases in school following precautions can be taken:  
(i) Avoid contact of students suffering from air borne diseases like common cold, cough, eye, 
flu, etc.  
(ii) By checking the availability of clean drinking water in school.  
(iii) Clean surroundings in school will not allow the growth and multiplication of vectors.  
(iv) Starting childhood immunisation programme in schools.  
 
Q4. What is immunisation?  
Answer:  
Immunisation is a process of administration (injecting) of vaccine i nto a healthy person in 
order to develop immunity against a disease. Immunity means the ability of a body to 
recognise, destroy and eliminate external disease causing agents. This immunisation through 
administering vaccine is called vaccination. Vaccine co ntains disease -causing organisms in a 
diluted or weakened form or in living or dead form. It prevents further infection by microbes 
from causing the disease. The diseases like small pox, rabies, diphtheria chicken pox, polio, 
hepatitis are controlled by va ccination. Small pox is eliminated from the world through a world 
wide vaccination programme.  
 
Q5. What are the immunisation programmes available at nearest health centre in 
locality? Which of these diseases are the major health problems in your area?  
Answ er:  
The following immunisation programme is available at the nearest health centre in our locality  
(i) Immunisation for infants —DPT, BCG, polio, measles and MMR.  
(ii) For children —Typhoid, TT, DT, small pox and TAB.  
(iii) For pregnant woman — TT and hepati tis-B. 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 137 - 
 The diseases like typhoid, polio, measles, tetanus are the major health problems in our locality. 
To prevent these diseases, our government have initiated expanded immunisation programme 
all over the country.  
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  188  
 
Q1. How many times did you fall ill in the last one years? What were the illnesses?  
(a) Think of one change you could make in your habits in order to avoid any of/most of 
the above illnesses.  
(b) Think of one change you would wish for in your surroundings in o rder to avoid any 
of/most of the above illnesses.  
Answer:  I fell ill twice in the last one year. The disease, I first suffered from was diarrhoea 
and secondary the dengue fever.  
(a) The changes I brought in my habits after suffering from these disease to protect myself in 
near future are  
(i) I will always drink clean, pure water and wash hands before eating anything.  
(ii) I will live in clean surroundings where disease spreading vectors could not mulitply. For 
example, mosquitoes.  
(b) Pure drinking water s hould be available always. The intake of impure water is the main 
cause of many infectious diseases.  
 
Q2. A doctor/nurse/health -worker is exposed to more sick people than others in the 
community. Find out how she/he avoids getting sick herself/himself.  
Answer:  A doctor/nurse/health -worker take following precautions to avoid become sick 
themselves  
(i) Wear masks while diagnosing mouth or chest infections.  
(ii) Clean their hands and wear gloves even while doing minor surgeries.  
(iii) Get immunisation done ag ainst all the infectious diseases.  
(iv) Take balanced diet (rich in proteins especially) to strengthen their immune system.  
(v) Dispose off blood samples, urine or stool, sputum, etc., carefully.  
 
Q3. Conduct a survey in your neighbourhood to find out what  the three most common 
diseases are. Suggest three steps that could be taken by your local authorities to bring 
down the incidence of these diseases.  
Answer: I conducted a survey in my neighbourhood and found following three most common 
diseases.  
Diseases  Symptoms  Steps could be Taken by Local Authorities to 
Bring Down the Incidence  
Typhoid  Headache and fever 
which remains high in 
the second week and 
then declines  Proper hygiene in surrounding areas of 
living.  
Safe disposal of excreta and other wastes.  
Providing TAB and typhoid oral vaccine.  
Cholera  Painless watery 
diarrhoea, effortless 
vomiting  Good sanitary condition in community.  
Provision of clean, purified drinking 
water.  
Providing standard cholera vaccination in 
the locality.  
Dengue 
fever  High fever  w i t h  
headache, weakness 
and joint pains  Maintenance of hygienic conditions in 
community .  
Preventing the mosquito breeding sites.  
Public awarness programme against 
mosquito borne diseases.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 138 - 
 Q4. A baby is not able to tell her/his caretakers that she/he is sick. What would help us to 
find out (a) that the baby is sicks? (b) What is the sickness?  
Answer:  
 (a) Symptoms to help in finding out that the baby is sick are:  
(i) continuous crying  
(ii) drooping of eyes  
(iii) redness of eyes  
(iv) high temperature of b ody. 
(b) Signs which help to indicate the sickness in baby  
(i) loose motions, stomach pain indicate diarrhoea.  
(ii) high fever, headache, muscular pain, feeling of shivering and cold indicate malaria.  
(iii) redness and persistent rubbing of eyes indicate e ye flu.  
(iv) pale skin, yellow urine, yellowing of eyes indicate jaundice.  
(v) doctors suggest for laboratory tests, if there is fever with no other symptoms to find out the 
kind of sickness.  
 
Q5. Under which of the following conditions is a person most li kely to fall sick?  
(a) When she is recovering from malaria.  
(b) When she has recovered from malaria and is taking care of someone suffering from 
chicken pox.  
(c) When she is on a four -day fast after recovering from malaria and is taking care of 
someone suf fering from chicken pox. Why?  
Answer:  
In condition (c), a person is most likely to fall sick. The reasons are:  
(a) Due to malaria, the body becomes weak and loss of body fluids occur. In this condition, it 
she takes four days fast, her recovery from malar ia related weakness will not occur and she will 
become more weak.  
(b) Her immune system is already weak due to malaria and if she takes care of someone 
suffering from chicken pox, there is high probability that she may also suffer this diseases.  
 
Q6. Under  which of the following conditions are you most likely to fall sick?  
(a) When you are taking examinations.  
(b) When you have travelled by bus and train for two days.  
(c) When your friend is suffering from measles.  Why?  
Answer:  
In condition (c), Charles o f falling sick are maximum. Measles is an infectious viral disease of 
young children which spreads through nasal or throat discharge.In contact of a friend suffering 
from measles can cause you sick.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 150 - 
 CHAPTER – 14 
 
NATURAL RESOURCES  
 
 
RESOURCES ON THE EARTH  
Biosphere:  
The whole combination of animals, plants and non -living beings which by their interaction 
make the planet earth a live and vibrant place is called biosphere.  
 
Biotic Components:  
Living things constitute  the biotic component of the biosphere.  
 
Abiotic Components:  
The air, the water and the soil form the non -living or a biotic component of the biosphere. The 
air is called the hygrosphere, the water is hydrosphere and the soil is called lithosphere.  
 
 
 
AIR 
 
Air is a mixture of many gases like nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide and water vapour. All 
living beings need oxygen to break down glucose molecules and get energy for their activities. 
This results in the production of carbon dioxide. Another process w hich results in the 
consumption of oxygen and the concomitant production of carbon dioxide is combustion. This 
includes not just human activities, which burn fuels to get energy, but also forest fires. Despite 
this, the percentage of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere is a mere fraction of a percent because 
of carbon dioxide fixation.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 151 - 
 
 
 
Carbon Dioxide Fixation  
(i) Green plants convert carbon dioxide into glucose in the presence of Sunlight and  
(ii) Many marine animals use carbonates dissolved in sea -water t o make their shells.  
 
The Role of the Atmosphere in Climate Control:  
Atmosphere covers the Earth, like a blanket. We know that air is a bad conductor of heat. The 
atmosphere keeps the average temperature of the Earth fairly steady during the day and even 
during the course of the whole year. The atmosphere prevents the sudden increase in 
temperature during the daylight hours. And during the night, it slows down the escape of heat 
into outer space. The moon, which is about the same distance from the Sun that the Earth is, 
with no atmosphere, the temperature ranges from –190º C to 110º C.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 152 - 
 THE MOVEMENT OF AIR: WINDS  
These phenomena are the result of changes that take place in our atmosphere due to the heating 
of air and the formation of water vapour. Water v apour is formed due to the heating of water 
bodies and the activities of living organisms. The rise in temperature creates a low pressure 
zone which attracts cool air from high pressure zone and pushes up the hot air. Thus the 
atmosphere can be heated from  below by the radiation that is reflected back or re -radiated by 
the land or water bodies. On being heated, convection currents are set up in the air.  
 
 
 
AIR POLLUTION  
An air pollutant is known as a substance in the air that can cause harm to humans and the 
environment. Pollutants can be in the form of solid particles, liquid droplets, or gases. In 
addition, they may be natu ral or man -made.  
Pollutants can be classified as either primary or secondary. Usually, primary pollutants are 
substances directly emitted from a process, such as ash from a volcanic eruption, the carbon 
monoxide gas from a motor vehicle exhaust or sulfur d ioxide released from factories.  
Secondary pollutants are not emitted directly. Rather, they form in the air when primary 
pollutants react or interact. An important example of a secondary pollutant is ground level 
ozone - one of the many secondary pollutant s that make up photochemical smog.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 153 - 
 RAIN 
When water bodies are heated  during the day, a large amount of water evaporates and goes into 
the air. Some amount of water vapour also gets into the atmosphere because of various 
biological activities. This air also gets heated. The hot air rises up carrying the water vapour 
with it . As the air rises, it expands and cools. This cooling causes the water vapour in the air to 
condense in the form of tiny droplets. This condensation of water is facilitated if some particles 
could act as the ‘nucleus’ for these drops to form around. Once the water droplets are formed, 
they grow bigger by the ‘condensation’ of these water droplets. When the drops have grown 
big and heavy, they fall down in the form of rain.  
Rainfall patterns are decided by the prevailing wind patterns. In large parts of Ind ia, rains are 
mostly brought by the southwest or north -east monsoons.  
 
 
WATER: A WONDER LIQUID  
 
Water occupies a very large area of the Earth’s surface and is also found underground. Some 
amount of water exists in the form of water vapour in the atmospher e. Most of the water on 
Earth’s surface is found in seas and ocean sand is saline. Fresh water is found frozen in the ice -
caps at the two poles and on snow covered mountains. The underground water and the water in 
rivers, lakes and ponds is also fresh. How ever, the availability of fresh water varies from place 
to place. Practically every summer, most places have to face a shortage of water. And in rural 
areas, where water supply systems have not been installed, people are forced to spend 
considerable amount s of time in fetching water from faraway sources.  
 
Importance of Water: All cellular processes take place in a water medium. All the reactions 
that take place within our body and within the cells occur between substances that are 
dissolved in water. Substa nces are also transported from one part of the body to the other in a 
dissolved form. Hence, organisms need to maintain the level of water within their bodies in 
order to stay alive. Terrestrial life -forms require fresh water for this because their bodies 
cannot tolerate or get rid of the high amounts of dissolved salts in saline water. Thus, water 
sources need to be easily accessible for animals and plants to survive on land.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 154 - 
 WATER POLLUTION  
 
Water pollution is the contamination of water bodies such as lak es, rivers, ocean and 
groundwater caused by human activities, which can be harmful to organisms and plants that 
live in these water bodies. Some of the causes of water pollution are shown in below figure:  
 
 
 
We use the term water -pollution to cover the fo llowing effects:  
1. The addition of undesirable substances to water -bodies. These substances could be the 
fertilizers and pesticides used in farming or they could be poisonous substances, like mercury 
salts which are used by paper -industries. These could a lso be disease -causing organisms, like 
the bacteria which cause cholera.  
2. The removal of desirable substances from water -bodies. Dissolved oxygen is used by the 
animals and plants that live in water. Any change that reduces the amount of this dissolved 
oxygen would adversely affect these aquatic organisms. other nutrients could also be depleted 
from the water bodies.  
3. A change in temperature. Aquatic organisms are used to a certain range of temperature in the 
water -body where they live, and a sudden mar ked change in this temperature would be 
dangerous for them or affect their breeding. The eggs and larvae of various animals are 
particularly susceptible to temperature changes.  
 
SOIL  
Soil is an important resource that decides the diversity of life in an ar ea. The outermost layer of 
our Earth is called the crust and the minerals found in this layer supply a variety of nutrients to 
life-forms.  
The factors or processes that make soil:  
• The Sun:  The Sun heats up rocks during the day so that they expand. At ni ght, these rocks 
cool down and contract. Since all parts of the rock do not expand and contract at the same rate, 
this results in the formation of cracks and ultimately the huge rocks break up into smaller 
pieces.  
• Water:  Water helps in the formation of s oil in two ways. One, water could get into the cracks 
in the rocks formed due to uneven heating by the Sun. If this water later freezes, it would cause 
the cracks to widen. Two, flowing water wears away even hard rock over long periods of time. 
Fast flowin g water often carries big and small particles of rock downstream. These rocks rub 
against other rocks and the resultant abrasion causes the rocks to wear down into smaller and 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 155 - 
 smaller particles. The water then takes these particles along with it and deposi ts it further down 
its path. Soil is thus found in places far away from its parent rock.  
• Wind:  In a process similar to the way in which water rubs against rocks and wears them 
down, strong winds also erode rocks down. The wind also carries sand from one place to the 
other like water does.  
 
 
 
BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYCLES  
A constant interaction between the biotic and abiotic components of the biosphere makes it a 
dynamic, but stable system. These interactions consist of a transfer of matter and energy 
between the  different components of the biosphere.  
 
THE WATER -CYCLE  
The water cycle, also known as the hydrologic cycle, describes the continuous movement of 
water on, above, and below the surface of the earth.  
 
Water can change states among liquid, vapour and ice at various places in the water 
cycle. Although the balance of water on Earth remains fairly constant over time, individual 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 156 - 
 water molecules can come and go. The sun, which drives the water cycle, heats water in the 
oceans. Water evaporates as vapor into the  air. Ice and snow can sublimate directly into water 
vapor. Rising air currents take the vapor up into the atmosphere where cooler temperatures 
cause it to condense into clouds. Air currents move clouds around the globe, cloud particles 
collide, grow, and fall out of the sky as precipitation. Some precipitation falls as snow and can 
accumulate as ice caps and glaciers, which can store frozen water for thousands of years. Snow 
packs can thaw and melt, and the melted water flows overland as snowmelt. Most pre cipitation 
falls back into the oceans or onto land, where the precipitation flows over the ground as surface 
runoff. A portion of runoff enters rivers in valleys in the landscape, with stream flow moving 
water towards the oceans. Runoff and groundwater, ar e stored as freshwater in lakes.  
 
Not all runoff flows into rivers. Much of it soaks into the ground as infiltration. Some 
water infiltrates deep into the ground and replenishes aquifers, which store huge amounts of 
freshwater for long periods of time. So me infiltration stays close to the land surface and can 
seep back into surface -water bodies (and the ocean) as groundwater discharge. Some 
groundwater finds openings in the land surface and emerges as freshwater springs. Over time, 
the water reenters the o cean, where our water cycle started.  
 
THE NITROGEN -CYCLE  
The nitrogen cycle is the biogeochemical cycle that describes the transformations of nitrogen 
and nitrogen -containing compounds in nature. It is a cycle which includes gaseous 
components.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 157 - 
 Earth’s a tmosphere is about 78% nitrogen, making it the largest pool of nitrogen. Nitrogen is 
essential for many biological processes; it is crucial for any life here on Earth. It is in all amin o 
acids, is incorporated into proteins, and is present in the bases tha t make up nucleic acids, such 
as DNA and RNA. In plants, much of the nitrogen is used in chlorophyll molecules which are 
essential for photosynthesis and further growth.  
Processing, or fixation, is necessary to convert gaseous nitrogen into forms usable b y living 
organisms. Some fixation occurs in lightning strikes, but most fixation is done by free -living or 
symbiotic bacteria. These bacteria have the nitrogenase enzyme that combines gaseous 
nitrogen with hydrogen to produce ammonia, which is then further  converted by the bacteria to 
make its own organic compounds. Some nitrogen fixing bacteria, such as Rhizobium, live in 
the root nodules of legumes (such as peas or beans). Here they form a mutualistic relationship 
with the plant, producing ammonia in exch ange for carbohydrates. Nutrient -poor soils can be 
planted with legumes to enrich them with nitrogen. A few other plants can form such 
symbioses. Nowadays, a very considerable portion of nitrogen is fixated in ammonia chemical 
plants.  
 
THE CARBON -CYCLE  
The carbon cycle is the biogeochemical cycle by which carbon is exchanged among the 
biosphere, pedosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere of the Earth.  
The cycle is usually thought of as four major reservoirs of carbon interconnected by pathways 
of ex change. These reservoirs are:  
(I) The atmosphere.  
(II) The terrestrial biosphere, which is usually defined to include fresh water systems and non -
living organic material, such as soil carbon.  
(III) The oceans, including dissolved inorganic carbon and liv ing and non -living marine biota,  
(IV) The sediments including fossil fuels.  
 
 
THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT  
The greenhouse effect refers to the change in the steady state temperature of a planet or moon 
by the presence of an atmosphere containing gas that absor bs and emits infrared 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 158 - 
 radiation.Greenhouse gases, which include water vapor, carbon dioxide and methane, warm the 
atmosphere by efficiently absorbing thermal infrared radiation emitted by the earth’s surface, 
by the atmosphere itself, and by clouds. As a r esult of its warmth, the atmosphere also radiates 
thermal infrared in all directions, including downward to the Earth’s surface. Thus, greenhouse 
gases trap heat within the surface -troposphere system. The greenhouse effect is one of several 
factors that af fect the temperature of the Earth.  
 
 
THE OXYGEN -CYCLE  
The oxygen cycle is the biogeochemical cycle that describes the movement of oxygen within 
and between its three main reservoirs: the atmosphere (air), the biosphere (living things), and 
the lithosphere  (earth’s crust). The main driving factor of the oxygen cycle is photosynthesis, 
which is responsible for the modern Earth's atmosphere and life.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 159 - 
 Energy Cycle  
All the above mentioned cycle can be grouped or explained as energy cycle on this earth. In 
fact sun is the main source of energy for every activity on earth. This energy facilitates the 
everlasting cycle of all resources in the biosphere. This system ensures that whatever we take 
from earth and its atmosphere we return it in some way or other. A li ving organism is made of 
Carbon, Oxygen, Nitrogen and other elements. All living organisms need regular dose of these 
elements to continue life. During lifetime all these things are returned to the atmosphere in 
some way. For example we return oxygen in th e form of carbon dioxide and return water in the 
form of sweat or urine.  
Ultimately when a living being dies, then the body gets decomposed by decomposers, like 
bacteria. These decompose the body into basic elements out of which it was originally made. 
That is how the everlasting cycle of life goes on.  
 
OZONE LAYER  
The ozone layer is a layer in earth’s atmosphere which contains relatively high concentrations 
of ozone. This layer absorbs 93 -99% of the sun’s high frequency ultraviolet light, which is 
potentia lly damaging to life on earth. Over 91% of the ozone in Earth's atmosphere is present 
here. It is mainly located in the lower portion of the stratosphere from approximately 10 km to 
50 km above Earth's surface, though the thickness varies seasonally and ge ographically.  
Because of heavy use of CFCs (Chlorofuorocarbons) in refrigerators and pressurized cans by 
human the ozone layer has broken at some places. This has caused an alarming rise in 
ultraviolet radiation leading to increased cases of skin cancers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 160 - 
 POINTS TO REMEMBER  
 
OXYGEN CYCLE   
The oxygen in the atmosphere is freed by the process of photolysis.  The energy in the 
sunlight breaks the oxygen bearing oxygen to produce free oxygen. Oxygen molecule is 
broken down by UV  rays from the sun. Thi s cycle shields earth from harmful UV  rays.   
In the biosphere, oxygen undergoes cycles of respiration and photosynthesis.  Humans and 
animals breathe in oxygen. This oxygen is used in metabolic processes and carbon dioxide 
given out.  Plants and phytoplankto ns undergo process of photosynthesis where carbon 
dioxide is used in the prescence of sunlight to form carbohydrates and oxygen.   
In the lithosphere, oxygen is fixed in minerals like silicates and oxides. Oxygen from these 
minerals is  freed by chemical wea thering. When the mineral bearing oxygen is exposed to 
chemical reaction, the mineral wears down free oxygen is produced.   
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 163 - 
 INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  193  
 
Q1. How is our atmosphere different from the atmosphere on Venus and Mars?  
Answer: The atmos phere of Earth contains a mixture of many gases like nitrogen (78.08%), 
oxygen (20.95%), carbon dioxide (0.03%) and water vapour (in varying proportion). On the 
other hand, the atmosphere on Venus and Mars mainly contains carbon dioxide, i.e., about 95 -
97%. It may be the reason that due to this, no life is known to exist in both Venus and Mars.  
 
Q2. How does the atmosphere act as a blanket?  
Answer: The atmosphere mainly contains air which is a bad conductor of heat. Due to this, the 
atmosphere keeps the ave rage temperature of the Earth fairly balanced during the day and even 
throughout the year. The atmosphere prevents the sudden increase in temperature during the 
daylight hours and during the night, it slows down the escape of heat into the outer space. In 
this way, atmosphere acts as a blanket.  
 
Q3. What causes winds?  
Answer: Winds occur due to unequal heating of atmospheric air. The heat causes rising up of 
air along with water vapour. As the air rises, it expands and cools. This cooling causes the 
water v apour in the air to condense. The condensation of water occurs if some particles (like 
dust particles) act as the ‘nucleus’ for these drops to stick around. These tiny droplets grow 
bigger by more and more condensation of other water droplets and finally f orm the clouds.  
 
Q4. How are clouds formed?  
Answer: Water evaporates from water bodies and goes into the atmosphere. Air also becomes 
hot due to sunlight and starts rising up taking along with water vapour. As the air rises up, it 
expands and cools. This c ooling of air causes water vapour in the air to condense. The process 
of condensation of water occurs, if some particles (like dust) act as the ‘nucleus’ for these 
drops to form around. None these small droplets grow and become big by more and more 
condens ation of other droplets of water. These steps form the clouds.  
 
Q5. List any three human activities that you think would lead to air pollution.  
Answer: The following activities lead to air pollution:  
(i) Excessive burning of fossil fuels, i.e., coal and pe troleum produces high amount of oxides 
of nitrogen and sulphur. These oxides mix with air and cause acid rain leading to many harmful 
effects.  
(ii) Many industries release high amount of poisonous gases into the atmosphere causing air 
pollution.  
(iii) Fore st fires, excessive use of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) used in refrigerators, excessive 
mining and ore refining release harmful gases into the air leading to pollution.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  194  
 
Q1. Why do organisms need water?  
Answer: Organisms need  water because:  
(i) Cellular processes need water for their functioning.  
(ii) Substances dissolve in water for reactions to take place within the cells.  
(iii) Transportation of substances within the body need water.  
(iv) Water helps in digestion of food an d its absorption in the blood.  
(v) It helps to maintain body temperature.  
 
Q2. What is the major source of freshwater in the city/town/village where you live?  
Answer: In city/town/village, the major source of water is underground water. It is drawn with 
the help of hand pumps and tube -wells. The other nearby sources are rivers, lakes and ponds.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 164 - 
 Q3. Do you know of any activity which may be polluting this water source?  
Answer: The activities which may be polluting the water bodies are:  
(i) Disposal of garbage  or sewage from cities/towns and from factories.  
(ii) Hot water may be released from the industries which may disturb the temperature of water 
body leading to death of many aquatic organisms.  
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  196  
 
Q1. How is soil formed?  
Answer : The formation of soil takes place in the following ways:  
(i) Rocks near the surface of Earth are broken down by various physical, chemical and some 
biological processes. This process takes millions of years.  
(ii) This weathering leads to the formation of  fine particles called soil.  
(iii) Some other factors also lead to the formation of soil. These are:  
(a) Sun causes heating of rocks that causes cracking and breaks down them into small 
particles.  
(b) Water dissolve rocks by freezing and fast flowing.  
(c) Wind causes erosion of rocks by fast blowing.  
(d) Liches and mosses grow on rock surfaces and break them into powder down and form a 
thin layer of soil. The big trees sometimes enter into cracks in the rocks and force them to 
break further during their gro wth. 
 
Q2. What is soil erosion?  
Answer: Soil erosion is the process of removal of top soil. It is rich in humus and nutrients. 
The agents of soil erosion are mainly flowing water or wind. If soil erosion is continued for a 
long time, the land becomes infer tile and barren due to the loss of its valuable nutrients.  
 
Q3. What are the methods of preventing or reducing soil erosion?  
Answer: Preventive methods of soil erosion  
(i) Afforestation Planting more trees reduces soil erosion.  
(ii) Contour Ploughing Ploug hing land in furrows across the natural slope of the land helps 
trap water and prevent the washing away of top soil along with it.  
(iii) Step (terrace) Farming Farmers form a series of steps by making horizontal strips 
supported by walls to catch the desce nding water. It gives the water sufficients time to 
percolate into the soil and nourish the crop.  
(iv) Soil Cover After harvesting a crop, soil is covered with dried vegetation to prevent its 
erosion.  
(v) Overgrazing Grasses tend to bind soil particles to prevent their erosion. If overgrazing is 
allowed, the grasses are uprooted and soil gets eroded.  
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  201  
 
Q1. What are the different states in which water is found during the water cycle?  
Answer:  Water can be seen in water cycle i n its all three different states.  
These are:  
(i) Gaseous State It occurs in the form of water vapour. It evaporates from the surface of water 
bodies and mixes with air.  
(ii) Liquid State Water vapour condense high up in the atmosphere. It falls on the Eart h in the 
form of rain.  
(iii) Solid State It is formed by the freezing of liquid droplets in the upper layer of atmosphere. 
These droplets fall on the Earth in the form of snow, hail or sleet.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 165 - 
 Q2. Name two biologically important compounds that contain both oxygen and nitrogen.  
Answer: The biologically important compounds that contain both oxygen and nitrogen are 
nitrates ( NO 2−) and nitrates (NO 3−) . These are important forms of nitrogen to be utilized by 
the plants to synthesize biomolecules like proteins.  
 
Q3. List any three human activities which would lead to an increase in the carbon dioxide 
content of air.  
Answer: The hum an activities which would lead to an increase in CO 2 content of air are:  
(i) Respiration is the natural way to release of CO 2 by both plants and animals. It is balanced 
by the release of oxygen by plants. So, it is not harmful for the environment.  
(ii) Deforestation increases the level of CO 2 in the environment. Trees carry out 
photosynthesis and convert CO 2 into organic compounds such as glucose, starch, etc. In their 
absence, CO 2 cannot be utilized.  
(iii) Combustion of fuels leads to increase in CO  l ev el  in the atmosphere. Fuels are burnt to 
carryout activities like cooking, transportation and in industrial processes.  
 
Q4. What is the greenhouse effect?  
Answer: Some gases called greenhouse gases, e.g., CO 2 prevent the escape of heat from the 
Earth. When t he amount of such gases increases more than their normal levels, the average 
temperature of the Earth increases. This is called greenhouse effect.  
 
Q5. What are the two forms of oxygen found in the atmosphere?  
Answer: The two forms of oxygen found in the a tmosphere are:  
(i) Elemental oxygen is normally found in the form of diatomic molecule (O 2) in the lower part 
of atmosphere. It is about 21% in the air and non -poisonous.  
(ii) Ozone is found in the stratosphere part of atmosphere. It contains three atoms o f 
oxygen(O 3). It is the poisonous form of oxygen.  
(iii) Some other forms of oxygen are also found in the combined state. In Earth’s crust, it is 
found as the oxides of most metals and silicon and also as carbonate, sulphate, nitrate and other 
minerals. In other forms, it is the part of biological molecules like carbohydrates, proteins, fats 
and nucleic acids, etc.  
 
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS PAGE NO.  201,  202  
 
Q1. Why is the atmosphere essential for life?  
Answer: Atmosphere is important for life due to followin g reasons:  
(i) It keeps the average temperature of the Earth steady during the day and even throughout the 
year.  
(ii) It prevents the sudden increases in temperature during the daylight hours.  
(iii) The gases it contains are required for sustaining life on  Earth. These gases are:  
(a) Oxygen which is required for respiration by all living organisms.  
(b) Carbon dioxide is used in photosynthesis by plants to synthesize food.  
(c) Nitrogen provides intert atmosphere and an important components of proteins.  
(iv) A thick layer of ozone (in stratosphere) of atmosphere, filters the harmful UV radiations 
reaching the Earth. The UV rays produce harmful effects on all living organisms.  
 
Q2. Why is water essential for life?  
Answer: Water is essential for life because of these reasons:  
(i) It provides medium to carryout all the cellular processes.  
(ii) All the reactions that occur in our body and within cells occur between substances that are 
dissolved in water  
(iii) It is required for the transportation of materials from one part of the body to the other.  
(iv) It helps to maintain body temperature.  
(v) Water makes up about 70% of body weight of all the living organisms.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 166 - 
 Q3. How are living organisms dependent on soil? Are organisms that live in water totally 
independent of soil as a resource?  
Answer: Living organisms depend on soil in the following ways:  
(i) It provides natural habitat for various living organisms, e.g., bacteria, fungi, algae, 
earthworms, etc. These help to maintain the fertility of soil.  
(ii) Earthwrom per forms all its activities in the soil. It maintains the fertility of soil by releasing 
nitrogen rich excreta.  
(iii) Many animals like rats, rabbits, etc., make their home in the soil.  
(iv) Soil helps to bind the roots of plants to provide them anchorage. Th e nutrients in soil are 
absorbed by the plants for their growth and development.  
 
All organisms that live in water are totally dependent on soil because the mineral nutrients are 
present in water in the dissolved form. But, their recycling depends on the d ecomposers which 
are present in soil beds. For this, all water bodies have soil beds which contain decomposers 
for the recycling of nutrients.  
 
Q4. You have seen weather reports on television and in newspapers. How, do you think 
we are able to predict the weather?  
Answer: Meterologists collect information regarding the pattern of temperature, speed of 
wind, air pressure and all other features which influence weather. All these information are 
collected by remote sensing and weather forecast satellites. This  information is then compiled 
in meterological departments which prepare a weather report that is displayed on the maps. 
This information is further transmitted through radio, television and newspaper.  
 
Q5. We know that many human activities lead to increa sing levels of pollution of the air, 
water -bodies and soil. Do you think that isolating these activities to specific and limited 
areas would help in reducing pollution?  
Answer: Isolating human activities to specific and limited areas would definitely help in 
reducing pollution to some extent. For example,  
(i) If sewage and garbage generated by homes and industries is treated properly before 
discharging into water sources, it will reduce water pollution and cause less harm to the aquatic 
life. 
(ii) If hot wa ter generated by the industries is collected at common place, allowed to cool and 
then discharged in water bodies, will not affect the breeding capacity of aquatic organisms.  
(iii) If commercial areas, factories and industries are shifted to the isolated a re a far away from 
residential areas, it can reduce the effect of air pollution on people.  
 
Q6. Write a note on how forests influence the quality of our air, soil and water resources.  
Answer: Forests influence the quality of air, soil and water resources i n following ways:  
(i) Influence of forests on air occurs in these ways:  
(a) Forests help to maintain oxygen and carbon dioxide balance in the air. They reduce the 
level of CO 2 in the air and to prevent greenhouse effect.  
(b) These maintain temperature of t he environment.  
(c) Forests increase the rate of photosynthesis in surrounding region.  
(ii) Influence of forests in quality of soil:  
(a) Trees spread their roots deep inside the Earth and bind the soil particles firmly. This 
reduces soil erosion.  
(b) Fores ts help to maintain nutrient cycles (biogeochemical cycles) in the atmosphere.  
(iii) Influence of forests in quality of water:  
(a) Trees help to maintain water cycle.  
(b) Forests conserve water and make them available on the surface of Earth as water 
sourc es. 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 182 - 
 CHAPTER – 15 
 
IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
There is a need to introduce production efficiency of crops and  livestock because  
1. rapid increase in population  
2. No major scope of increasing area of land under cultivation.  
 
Increase in food production without degrading our environment and disturbing the ecological 
balance i.e. Sustainable Practices are required in agriculture and animal husbandry.  
 
TYPES OF CROPS  
Cereals: wheat, rice, maize, millets and sorghum. Provide carbohydrates for energy 
requirements.  
 
Pulses: pea, gram, black gram, green gram, pigeon pea and lentil. Provide proteins  
 
Oilseeds: soya bean, ground nut, sesame, castor, mustard, linseed and sun flower. Provide 
necessary fats.  
 
Vegetables, spices and fruits provide vitamins and minerals.  
 
Crop means plants of same origin grown together in bulk. Every crop requires different 
climatic condition, w hile some crops grow together on one season. The climatic condition, 
warmth, photo -period for growth and completion is required for different crops.  
Two seasonal change types :  
a) Kharif crops  
b) Rabi crops.  
 
Main seasonal plants are divided into two br oad categories. The crops that grow in monsoon 
period is called Kharif crops which is around June to October. The crops that are harvested in 
winter period are called Rabi crops which are around November to April.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 183 - 
 RABI CROPS  
 
Rabi crops or Rabi harvests a re the crops in agriculture that are sown in winter or cold season. 
They are harvested in the spring. Rabi is Arabic word which in actual means “spring”. Thus the 
word “Rabi” is used frequently in subcontinent. Rabi is grown around the month of November 
to April in our subcontinent. The water collected from the rain in this season is the main source 
of water in these plants. Rabi crops require greater amount of irrigation. Thus heavy raining 
may ruin a Kharif crop but it is healthy and beneficial for Rabi c rops. These crops are then 
taken out at departure of the monsoon rains. The harvesting may begin by April or may. Major 
Rabi crops that are harvested in subcontinents are wheat, grams, peas, mustard, linseed and 
barley. Most of the crops are under Rabi sea son. It is an integral crop in our area.  
 
KHARIF CROPS  
 
Kharif crop refers to the farming, plowing, reaping and harvesting of any household plant sown 
in the rainy season. It is derived from mochas words in subcontinent. In subcontinent they are 
popularly known as monsoon plants. They are cultivated for autumn harvest. By the beginning 
of first rain in July during south west rainy season in monsoon the crops are sown. Its begins at 
April 16 to October 15 in Pakistan, while in India Kharif season varies stat e to state in may and 
ending latest by January. Popularly in subcontinent it starts in June and ends by October.  The 
Indian subcontinent is referred to areas covering India, Pakistan, Nepal and Srilanka. These 
crops are totally dependent on quantity of ra in and water as well as its timings. Too much or 
too less will affect its growth and the whole effort can go wasted. The harvesting period 
coincides with the beginning of winter/ autumn in Indian subcontinent it is called Kharif period 
or Kharif crops. The  major Kharif crops that are harvested in sub continent are paddy, soya -
bean, maize, pigeon -pea, and cotton, green and black grams.  
 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN KHARIF AND RABI CROPS  
Kharif crops sown between April and May while Rabi crops are sown between Septembe r 
and October.  
Kharif crops are harvested after monsoon rains while Rabi crops are produced after winter.  
Kharif crops are popularly known as monsoon crops while Rabi crops are called winter or 
spring crops.  
Kharif crops are completely relying over the rai n like if less or more in quantity while Rabi 
can deal with whatever water is present for irrigation. Rain has less impact over Rabi crops.  
The major examples that can be counted as Kharif crops are sunflower, rice, sugar cane, 
soya bean and tea while Rabi  crops can be wheat, barley, pea, gram and mustard.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 204  
 
Q1. What do we get from cereals, pulses, fruits and vegetables?  
Answer:  
(i) Cereals provide us with carbohydrates. Also, they are a rich source of energy.  
(ii) Pulses give  us proteins.  
(iii) Fruits and vegetables are a rich source of vitamins and minerals. A small amount of 
proteins, carbohydrates, and fats are also present in them.  
 
IMPROVING CROP YIELD  
The practices involved in farming are divided into three stages. They are 
(a) Choice of seeds for planting  
(b) Nurturing of the crop plants  
(c) Protection of the growing and harvested crops from loss.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 184 - 
 Hence the major activities for improving crop yields can be classified as  
(i) Crop variety improvement  
(ii) Crop production i mprovement  
(iii) Crop protection improvement  
 
CROP VARIETY IMPROVEMENT  
 
This approach depends on finding a crop that can give a good yield. Some of the factors for 
which variety improvement is done are:  
Higher yield : for increasing the productivity per acr e. 
Improved quality : quality considerations vary from crop to crop as per the requirements.  
Biotic and abiotic resistance : crops should have sufficient resistance to biotic factors 
(diseases, insects and nematodes) and abiotic stresses (heat, cold, frost e tc.) 
Change in maturity duration : the shorter the duration, the more economical is the variety.  
Wider adaptability : it can be grown in different climatic conditions.  
Desirable agronomic characteristics : tallness and profuse branching for fodder crops. 
Dwar fness is desired for cereals.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 185 - 
 This can be achieved by two methods; hybridisation and genetically modified crops.  
1. Hybridisation  
In genetics, hybridisation is the process of combining different varieties or species of 
organisms which are genetically d issimilar to create a hybrid. It can be inter varietal, inter 
specific, intergeneric.  
 
2. Genetically modified crops  
Here the crop is improved by introducing a gene that would provide desired characteristics.  
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 205  
 
Q1. How do bio tic and abiotic factors affect crop production?  
Answer:  
A variety of biotic factors such as pests, nematodes, diseases, etc. can reduce the net crop 
production. A pest causes damage to agriculture by feeding on crops. For example, boll weevil 
is a pest on  cotton. It attacks the cotton crop, thereby reducing its yield. Weeds also reduce 
crop productivity by competing with the main crop for nutrients, light, and space.  
 
Similarly, abiotic factors such as salinity, temperature, etc. affect the net crop produc tion. 
Some natural calamities such as droughts and floods are unpredictable. Their occurrence has a 
great impact on crops sometimes, destroying the entire crop.  
 
Q2. What are the desirable agronomic characteristics for crop improvements?  
Answer:  
The desir able agronomic characteristics for crop improvements are:  
(i) Tallness and profuse branching in any fodder crop.  
(ii) Dwarfness in cereals.  
These desirable agronomic characteristics help in increasing crop productivity.  
 
CROP PRODUCTION MANAGEMENT  
 
It involves different practices carried out by farmer to achieve higher standards of crop 
production. It includes the following:  
1. NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT  
2. IRRIGATION  
3. CROPPING PATTERN  
 
NUTRIENT MANAGEMENT  
 
The higher yields of crops mainly depend upon input applicati ons like improved  seeds, 
fertilizers and modern techniques of sowing and harvesting. Plants require a  number of 
nutrients for their growth and development.  
 
Plants get nutrients from air, water and soil. Nearly 16 elements are essential for plant growth 
and reproduction.  
On the basis of the requirement by the plants, they are further classified into Macro Nutrients 
and Micro Nutrients.  
 
MACRO NUTRIENTS  
Elements which are needed in large quantities for growth of the plants are called Macro 
Nutrients. They a re Carbon, Hydrogen, Oxygen, Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Sulphur, Potassium, 
Calcium, Magnesium and Iron.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 186 - 
  
MICRO NUTRIENTS  
Elements which are needed by the  plants in very small quantities are called  Micro Nutrients. 
They are Manganese,  Copper, Molybdenum, Zinc,  Boron and  Chlorine.  
 
Deficiency of these nutrients affects physiological processes in plants including reproduction, 
growth and susceptibility to diseases. To increase the yield, the soil can be enriched by 
supplying these nutrients in the form of manure and fertilizers.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 206  
 
Q1. What are macro -nutrients and why are they called macronutrients?  
Answer:  
Macro -nutrientsare nutrients required in relatively large quantities for growth and development 
of plants. They are six in number . Since they are required in large quantities, they are known as 
macro -nutrient. The six macro -nutrients required by plants are nitrogen, phosphorus, 
potassium, calcium, magnesium, and sulphur.  
 
Q2. How do plants get nutrients?  
Answer:  
Plants require sixt een essential nutrients from nature for their growth and development. All 
these nutrients are obtained from air, water, and soil. Soil is the major source of nutrients. 
Thirteen of these nutrients are available from soil. The remaining three nutrients (car bon, 
oxygen, and hydrogen) are obtained from air and water.  
 
MANURE  
Manure is an organic substance and  is prepared by the decomposition of plant  and animal 
wastes.  
 
Advantages of Manure  
Manures helps in enriching the soil with organic matter and nutrients.  
It helps in increasing the soil fertility.  
Water holding capacity of soil is increased.  
Helps in improving soil texture.  
Save our environment from excessive use of fertilizers.  
 
Manure is classified into two types according to the biological material used : 
 
COMPOST AND VERMI -COMPOST  
Composting:  It is the process in which farm waste material (cow dung, domestic waste, 
sewage waste etc) is decomposed in pits. Compost is the aerobically decomposed remnants of 
organic matter which is rich in nutrients.  
Vermico mposting: I t is the process which involve use of earthworms to hasten the process of 
decomposition of plant and animal refuse.  
 
GREEN MANURE  
Leguminous plants like Sunn -hemp  or Cluster Bean are grown and then  mulched by ploughing 
them back into  the soil. T his helps in enriching the soil  with Nitrogen and Phosphorous.  
 
FERTILIZERS  
 
Fertilizers are chemicals commercially produced in factories and used as plant  nutrients. They 
supply Nitrogen, Phosphorous, Potassium, etc., They are used to  ensure good vegetati ve 
growth giving rise to healthy plants.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 187 - 
 Advantage: They help in good vegetative growth and produce healthy plants.  
Disadvantage :  
Excessive use of fertilizer leads to pollution of water.  
Continuous use of fertilizer lead to decrease in soil fertility bec ause organic matter of the 
soil cannot be replenished as microorganisms present in soil get harmed due to fertilizer.  
 
Application of fertilizers results in  higher yield of crops. At the same time,  it increases the cost 
of farming. As the  fertilizers are w ater soluble chemicals,  large part of the fertilizers applied is  
washed away due to excessive irrigation.  They are not fully absorbed by the plants.   
 
This excess fertilizer is washed away into the ponds, lakes, canals and rivers, resulting in the 
growth o f unwanted plants like Water Hyacinth, algae, etc. These plants disturb the water 
bodies and the flow of water. As a result, fishes and other living organisms do not get sufficient 
sunlight and oxygen and die.  
 
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN MANURES AND FERTILIZERS  
 
 
Fertilizers which are derived from living  organisms are called Bio -fertilizers.  The main 
source of bio -fertilizers are  bacteria, cyanobacteria and fungi.  Bio-fertilizers are renewable 
and nonpolluting  sources of plant nutrients.  They also improve the soi l condition.  
Rhizobium and Cyanobacteria such  as Anabaena and Nostoc are some  common bio -
fertilizers.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 207  
 
Q1. Compare the use of manure and fertilizers in maintaining soil fertility.  
Answer:  
Manures increase soil fertility by e nriching the soil with organic matter and nutrients as it is 
prepared by the decomposition of animal excreta and plant wastes. On the other hand, 
fertilizers are mostly inorganic compounds whose excessive use is harmful to the symbiotic 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 188 - 
 micro -organisms liv ing in soil. Their excessive use also reduces soil fertility. Hence, fertilizers 
are considered good for only short term use.  
 
ORGANIC FARMING  
It’s a farming system in which use of chemicals such as fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides etc 
are reduced. It i nvolves the use of following components:  
a) Organic manure  
b) Recycled farm waste  
c) Bio-agents such as culture of blue green algae in preparation of bio fertilizers  
d) Bio pesticides such as leaves of neem or turmeric for grain storage  
e) Healthy cropping patterns such as mixed cropping, intercropping and crop rotation 
which will also help in controlling growth of weed, pest and insects.  
 
IRRIGATION  
Irrigation is necessary for crops to get water during their growing season.  
Source of irrigation : 
Wells: There are two type s of wells, namely dug wells and tube wells. In a dug well, water 
is collected from water bearing strata. Tube wells can tap water from the deeper strata. 
From these wells, water is lifted by pumps for irrigation.  
Canals: This is usually an elaborate and e xtensive irrigation system. In this system canals 
receive water from one or more reservoirs or from rivers. The main canal is divided into 
branch canals having further distributaries to irrigate fields.  
River Lift Systems: In areas where canal flow is insu fficient or irregular due to inadequate 
reservoir release, the lift system is more rational. Water is directly drawn from the rivers 
for supplementing irrigation in areas close to rivers.  
Tanks: These are small storage reservoirs, which intercept and store  the run -off of smaller 
catchment areas.  
Rain water harvesting  
Watershed management: building of small check dams which helps in increasing ground 
water level and helps in reducing soil erosion.  
 
CROPPING PATTERNS  
 
Different ways of growing crops can be us ed to give maximum benefit.  
 
MIXED CROPPING  
It is growing of two or more crops simultaneously on the same piece of land. It is also known 
as multiple cropping. This type of cropping leads to an improvement in the fertility of the soil 
and hence increase in  crop yield because when the two crops are properly chosen, the products 
and refuse from one crop help in the growth of the other crop plant and vice -versa. Mixed 
cropping is an insurance against crop failure due to abnormal weather and plant pests.  
Soyabe an + pigeon pea, Maize + urad dal (black gram),Groundnut + sunflower ,Wheat + Chick 
Pea. 
 
Advantages of Mixed cropping :  
No risk of crop failure ,  
Increase in yield,  
Improvement in soil fertility  
Minimizing Pest Damage.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 189 - 
 
 
INTER CROPPING  
Intercropping is  the agricultural practice of cultivating two or more crops in the same space at 
the same time in a definite pattern. Row - type intercropping cropping involves the component 
crops arranged in alternate rows. This may also be called alley cropping . A variat ion of row 
cropping is strip cropping, where multiple rows (or a strip) of one crop are alternated with 
multiple rows of another crop. Intercropping also uses the practice of sowing a fast growing 
crop with a slow growing crop, so that the fast growing cro p is harvested before the slow 
growing crop starts to mature.  
 
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN INTER CROPPING AND MIXED -CROPPING  
 
SELECTION OF CROPS FOR MIXED CROPPING AND INTERCROPPING:  
Crops are chosen whose nutrient requirements are different so that maximum utilis ation of the 
soil nutrients takes place. Also, their water needs, rooting patterns etc are different. Besides the  
advantages mentioned for mixed cropping,  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 190 - 
  
Intercropping has the following additional advantages : 
Application of pesticides and fertilizers is more convenient due to well defined patterns of 
crops.  
Harvesting of crops is also easier.  
 
CROP ROTATION  
 
It is the practice of growing a series of dissimilar types of crops in the same area in sequential 
seasons for various benefits such as to avoid the buildup of pathogens and pests that often 
occurs when one species is continuously cropped. Crop rotation also seeks to balance the 
fertility demands of various crops to avoid excessive depletion of soil nutrients. A traditional 
component of crop rotation i s the replenishment of nitrogen through the use of green manure in 
sequence with cereals and other crops. Crop rotation can also improve soil structure and 
fertility by alternating deep -rooted and shallow -rooted plants.  
 
Advantages:  
Crop rotation avoids a  decrease in soil fertility, as growing the same crop repeatedly in the 
same place eventually depletes the soil of various nutrients. A crop that leaches the soil of one 
kind of nutrient is followed during the next growing season by a dissimilar crop that returns 
that nutrient to the soil or draws a different ratio of nutrients, for example, rices followed by 
cottons. By crop rotation farmers can keep their fields under continuous production, without 
the need to let them lay fallow, and reducing the need fo r artificial fertilizers, both of which 
can be expensive. Rotating crops adds nutrients to the soil.  
 
CROP PROTECTION MANAGEMENT  
 
Field crops are infested by a large number of weeds, insect pests and diseases. If weeds and 
pests are not controlled at the a ppropriate time then they can damage the crops so much that 
most of the crop is lost. When the crop is in the field, it needs protection against:  
Weeds e.g.– Xanthium, Parthenium (weeds are considered to be harmful as they compete 
for food, space and light  with the desired crop. They reduce crop production taking up the 
nutrients meant for the crops.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 191 - 
 Insect Pests - Insect pests attack the plants in three ways: (i) they cut the root, stem and 
leaf, (ii) they suck the cell sap from various parts of the plant,  and (iii) they bore into stem 
and fruits. They thus affect the health of the crop and reduce yields.  
Pathogens - Microbes like bacteria, fungi and viruses cause diseases. Spores of these 
pathogens may be transmitted through soil, water and air.  
 
To control  these :  
Herbicides, Pesticides, fungicides should be used.  
 
Weed control methods also include mechanical removal. Preventive methods such as proper 
seed bed preparation, timely sowing of crops, intercropping and crop rotation also help in weed 
control. So me other preventive measures against pests are the use of resistant varieties, and 
summer ploughing, in which fields are ploughed deep in summers to destroy weeds and pests.  
 
Prevention for preventing the growth of weeds,  
Proper seed bed preparation,  
timel y growing of crops,  
intercropping , crop rotation,  
use of resistant varieties and  
summer ploughing is done.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 208  
 
Q1. Which of the following conditions will give the most benefits? Why?  
(a) Farmers use high -quality seeds, do not a dopt irrigation or use fertilizers.  
(b) Farmers use ordinary seeds, adopt irrigation and use fertilizer.  
(c) Farmers use quality seeds, adopt irrigation, use fertilizer and use crop protection 
measures.  
Answer:  
(c)Farmers using good quality seeds, adoptin g irrigation, using fertilizers, and using crop 
protection measures will derive most benefits.  
(i) The use of good quality seeds increases the total crop production. If a farmer is using good 
quality seeds, then a majority of the seeds will germinate prop erly, and will grow into a healthy 
plant.  
(ii) Proper irrigation methods improve the water availability to crops.  
(iii) Fertilizers ensure healthy growth and development in plants by providing the essential 
nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus, potassi um, etc.  
(iv) Crop protection measures include various methods to control weeds, pests, and infectious 
agents. If all these necessary measures are taken by a farmer, then the overall production of 
crops will increase.  
 
STORAGE OF GRAINS  
 
Factors responsib le for such losses are biotic — insects, rodents, fungi, mites and bacteria, and 
abiotic — inappropriate moisture and temperatures in the place of storage.  
 
Negative Effects of these factors on grains:  
Degradation in quality,  
loss in weight,  
poor germinabilt y, 
discoloration of produce - 
Leads to poor marketability  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 192 - 
 PREVENTION AND CONTROL METHODS USED BEFORE GRAINS ARE STORED:  
Cleaning of produce before storage  
Drying of produce first in sunlight and then in shade to reduce moisture content  
Fumigation using che micals (fumigants) to kill pests  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 209  
 
Q1. Why should preventive measures and biological control methods be preferred for 
protecting crops?  
Answer:  
Preventive measures and biological control methods should be preferred for protec ting crops 
because excessive use of chemicals leads to environmental problems. These chemicals are also 
poisonous for plants and animals. Preventive measures include proper soil and seed 
preparation, timely sowing of seeds, intercropping and mixed cropping , usage of resistant 
varieties of crops, etc. On the other hand, biological control methods include the usage of bio -
pesticides that are less toxic for the environment. An example of bio -pesticides is Bacillus 
thuringenesis, which is an insect pathogen tha t kills a wide range of insect larvae. Therefore, 
both preventive measures and biological control methods are considered eco - friendly methods 
of crop protection.  
 
Q2. What factors may be responsible for losses of grains during storage?  
Answer:  
During the  storage of grains, various biotic factors such as insects, rodents, mites, fungi, 
bacteria, etc. and various abiotic factors such as inappropriate moisture, temperature, lack of 
sunlight, flood, etc. are responsible for losses of grains. These factors act  on stored grains and 
result in degradation, poor germinability, discolouration, etc.  
 
 
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
 
The branch of agriculture which deals with the feeding, shelter, health and breeding of 
domestic animals such as cattle, pigs, horses and fowls is cal led animal husbandry.  
 
The various elements of animal husbandry are :  
1. Proper feeding of animals.  
2. Provision for clean drinking water for animals.  
3. Proper shelter for animals.  
4. Prevention and cure of animal diseases.  
5. Proper breeding of animals.  
 
ADVANTAGES OF ANIMAL HUSBANDRY  
As animal husbandry is scientific management of farm animals, it serves many uses for human 
beings.  
    •  It helps in enhancing milk production  
    •  It increases egg production  
    •  It increases meat production  
    •  I t increases fish production  
    •  It helps in proper management of agricultural wastes.  
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 193 - 
 
 
 
 
 
CATTLE FARMING  
 
A cattle farming is the practice of rearing cattle by providing facilities for raising livestock.  
Livestock includes domestication of cows, buf faloes, sheep, goats, pigs etc. A cattle farming is 
carried out to raise cows and buffaloes as important livestock. The two major species of Indian 
cattle are Bosindicus, or cows, and Bosbubalis, or buffaloes.  
 
MILCH ANIMALS AND DROUGHT ANIMALS  
On basis of  their utility, cattle are classified into two types namely milch animals and drought 
animals.  
Milch animals or dairy animals produce milk. Males of this type are not useful for working 
on farm.  
Draught animals are used for carrying out agricultural work l ike tilling, irrigation and 
carting. Cows belonging to this category are poor milk -yielding varieties.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 194 - 
  
 
 
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES FOR CATTLE FARMING  
 
Management practices for cattle include cleaning, sheltering and feeding.  
a) Cleaning involves periodic washing  to get rid of dirt and loose hair.  
b) Shelter facilities include well ventilated roof sheds which protect cattle from rain, cold 
and sun.  
c) Feeding of cattle includes supply of uncontaminated and balanced diet. Animal feed are 
of two types namely roughage feed  and concentrate feed.  
Roughage feed contains high fibre content and provides energy. It comprises fodder 
grasses, silage and legumes rich in fibre.  
Concentrate feed is a mixture of cereals, seeds and oilseed cake rich in protein content. 
This type of feed  is easily digestible and it helps the animal in increasing body weight.  
d) Cattle should be protected from diseases. Diseases in cattle are caused by both external 
and internal parasites. External parasites live on the skin and cause skin diseases. 
Internal parasites affect the stomach and intestinal parts. Certain preventive measures of 
diseases in animals are listed.  
Proper disposal of dead animals and animal wastes.  
Shelters should be clean, dry and well ventilated.  
Periodic visit of veterinary physician t o check the animals.  
Hygienic management of animals and animal products.  
e) Infectious diseases are caused by pathogens like bacteria, viruses and fungi. Sheds 
should be cleaned and disinfected regularly. Vaccination against various diseases 
should be provide d to farm animals. Vaccination should be given against various 
diseases.  
f) Milk production centres should be maintained for the animals which give birth to young 
ones. Milk production depends on duration of lactation period. Lactation period is the 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 195 - 
 period fo llowing the birth of a calf during which milk is produced by the animal. 
Lactation period can be enhanced by administering certain hormonal injections.  
g) Cross -breeding is done between foreign and local breeds of animals to facilitate the 
growth of animals w ith desired qualities. e.g. Foreign breed like Jersey cow, with long 
lactation period, is crossed with local breed like Red Sindhi cow, with high resistance 
to disease, to obtain offspring of desired qualities like long lactation period and high 
resistance  to diseases.  
 
ADVANTAGES OF CROSS -BREEDING  
Cross -breeding helps in the development of certain desired characteristics in animals.  
    •  To increase milk production  
    •  To increase resistance against diseases.  
    •  To enhance the varieties with longe r lactation period.  
    •  To rely on less amount of quality feed.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 210  
 
Q1. Which method is commonly used for improving cattle breeds and why?  
Answer:  
Cattle farming is commonly used for improving cattle breeds. The purpose of c attle farming is 
to increase the production of milk and draught labour for agricultural work. Dairy animals 
(females) are used for obtaining milk and draught animals (males) are engaged in agricultural 
fields for labour work such as carting, irrigation, ti lling, etc. Cross breeding between two good 
varieties of cattle will produce a new improved variety. For example, the cross between foreign 
breeds such as Jersey Brown, Swiss (having long lactation periods) and Indian breeds such as 
Red Sindhi, Sahiwal (ha ving excellent resistance power against diseases) produces a new 
variety having qualities of both breeds.  
 
POULTRY FARMING  
 
Poultry farming is the practice of raising fowl for egg production and chicken meat. Fowls are 
used for producing eggs and broilers are used for producing meat.  
 
Cross –breeding is common in poultry to develop new varieties with the desirable traits. e.g 
Indian breed Aseel is cross -bred with the foreign breed Leghorn.  
 
Cross -breeding is used to develop offspring with desirable traits. The desirable traits includes:  
number and quality of chicks;  
dwarf broiler parent for commercial chick production;  
summer adaptation capacity/ tolerance to high temperature;  
low maintenance requirements;  
reduction in the size of the egg -laying bird with ab ility to utilise more fibrous cheaper 
diets formulated using agricultural by -products.  
 
Management practices for poultry farming are elucidated.  
 
    •  Maintaining optimum temperature  
    •  Providing hygienic housing conditions  
    •  Providing a protein -rich diet with high levels of vitamin A and K, and  
    •  Preventing and controlling pests and diseases.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 196 - 
 
 
 
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 211  
 
Q1. Discuss the implications of the following statement:  
“It is interesting to note that poultry is India’s most e fficient converter of low fibre food 
stuff (which is unfit for human consumption) into highly nutritious animal protein food.”  
Answer:  
Poultry in India is the most efficient converter of low fibre food stuff into highly nutritious 
animal protein food. In poultry farming, domestic fowls are raised to produce eggs and 
chicken. For this, the fowls are given animal feeds in the form of roughage, which mainly 
consists of fibres. Thus, by feeding animals a fibre rich diet, the poultry gives highly nutritious 
food in the form of eggs and chicken.  
 
Q1. What management practices are common in dairy and poultry farming?  
Answer:  
Common management practices in dairy and poultry farming are:  
(i) Proper shelter facilities and their regular cleaning.  
(ii) Some basic hygi enic conditions such as clean water, nutritious food, etc.  
(iii) Animals are kept in spacious, airy, and ventilated place.  
(iv) Prevention and cure of diseases at the right time is ensured.  
 
Q2. What are the differences between broilers and layers and in their management?  
Answer:  
Layersare meant for egg production, whereas broilers are meant for poultry meat. Nutritional, 
environmental, and housing conditions required by broilers are different from those required by 
egg layers. A broiler chicken, for thei r proper growth, requires vitamin rich supplements 
especially vitamin A and K. Also, their diet includes protein rich food and enough fat. They 
also require extra care and maintenance to increase their survival rate in comparison to egg 
layers.  
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 197 - 
  
FISH FARMI NG 
 
Fish farming is also called as aquaculture. This is culturing of fish for commercial purposes. 
Fish is a cheap source of animal protein.  
 
TYPES OF FISHERY  
 
a) Fin fishery and Shell fishery  
Fish production involves fin fishery and shell fishery. Two main s pecies of finned true fish 
are Catla and Rohu, and that of shellfish such as prawns and molluscs.  
 
b) Capture fishery and culture fishery  
Fish are obtained by capture fishing as an economic source for their meat.  
Capture fishing involves capturing of fish fr om sea water or fresh water. Culture fishing 
involves culturing the fish in small enclosures.  
Capture fishing is classified into marine fishery and inland fishery depending upon the 
resources used for fishing.  
 
Culture fishery involves rearing of fish in s mall structures like wells.  
Fish farming can be done in the rice field where both grains and fish can be harvested 
from the farm.  
As feeding habits of fish differ from species to species, many varieties can be reared on 
the same farm. Composite fish farmin g is rearing of different varieties of fish in the 
same area.  e.g. Composite fish farming includes Catla, the surface feeders, Rohu, feed 
in the middle zone of a pond, Mrigal and common carp, the bottom feeders, and grass 
carp, feeding on weeds. These spe cies can co -exist in a single pond, and thus, increase 
the yield of fish from the pond.  
 
c) Marine fishery and Inland fishery  
Mariculture is the culture of fish in marine water.  
Marine fishery involves fishing in salt water regions.  
Some examples of marine fi sh are Pomphret, Tuna and Mackerel.  
Fish are captured by locating large schools of fish, in the open sea, with the help of 
satellites and echo -sounders.  
Marine fish of high economic value are farmed in seawater. Shellfish, such as prawns, 
mussels and oyste rs are also farmed in seawater. Oysters are cultivated for their pearls.  
 
Distinguishing features between Capture fishery, Mariculture and Aquaculture  
CAPTURE FISHERY  MARICULTURE  AQUACULTURE  
Fishes are caught from 
natural water resources.  Involves culturi ng and 
harvesting of fin fishes and 
shell fishes.  Involves culturing and 
harvesting of fish, prawns, 
crabs etc.  
No seeding and rearing are 
required.  Fish seeds are introduced 
and fish are reared.  Fish and other organisms 
are seeded and reared.   
This type  of fishing is done 
both in marine and inland 
waters.  Fishing is done only in sea 
water.  Fishing is done both in 
fresh water and marine 
waters.  
 
Inland fisheries involve fresh water canals, ponds, reservoirs, rivers from which fish are 
captured.  
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 198 - 
 Estuarie s are the regions where fresh water mixes with sea water. These are rich sources of 
fish. 
 
Fish farming encounters the problem of lack of quality seed or eggs. Fish are bred in ponds by 
hormonal stimulation. Fish are injected with hormones that stimulate t he production of eggs or 
seed. This ensures the supply of pure fish seed in desired quantities.  
 
APICULTURE  
 
The scientific method of rearing honeybees for honey and wax is called ‘Apiculture’ or ‘Bee 
keeping’. Beehives are enclosed structures in which hon ey bees live and raise their young.  
The practice of maintaining honey bee colonies in beehives is called bee -keeping or 
apiculture. Apiaries or bee farms are established for commercial production of honey.  
Bee-keeping is a cheap and popular agricultural en terprise.  
Honey produced in bee -hives is the source of honey used in food and medicines. Taste 
and the quality of the honey depend upon the flowers the bees visit for nectar 
collection.  
Wax obtained from these hives is used in ointments, polishes etc.  
 
TYP ES OF BEES  
There are three types of bees in a colony.  
a) Queen – The only fertile female in the hive and it’s function is to lay eggs.  
b) Drones  – These are fertile male bees and it’s function is to mate with queen bee and fertilize 
the eggs.  
c) Workers  – These are sterile females. They take care of the queen and young bees, collect 
nectar build honey combs and protect the bee hive.  
 
HONEYBEE VARIETIES  
a) Indigenous varieties  
i. Apis Indica – Common Indian honey bee.  
ii. Apis dorsata – Rock bee  
iii. Apis florea – Little bee.  
b) Exotic varieties  
i. Apis mellifera (Italian bee)  
ii. Apis adamsoni (South African bee)  
 
ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE OF HONEY BEES  
Honey bees are used in the production of honey and bee wax.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 199 - 
 USES OF HONEY  
1. Honey is an energy rich food. For eg. 1 Kg of honey c ontains 3200 calories of energy.  
2. Honey contains sugars, minerals, vitamins, enzymes and pollen.  
3. Honey is an antiseptic and contains formic acid as the preservative.  
4. Honey is a blood purifier, a cure against cough, cold,sore throat, ulcers of tongue, stomac h 
and intestine.  
5. Honey is helpful in building up the haemoglobin content of the blood.  
6. Honey is used in the preparation of bread, cakes and biscuits.  
 
BEE WAX  
It is utilized in the manufacture of cosmetics, lubricants, cold creams, shaving creams, 
polishes , candles, ointments and in medical preparations.  
 
INTEXT QUESTIONS PAGE NO. 213  
 
Q1. How are fish obtained?  
Answer:  
Fish can be obtained by two ways:  
(i) Capture fishing: It is the process of obtaining fish from natural resources.  
(ii) Culture fishery: I t is the practice of farming fishes. Farming can be done in both freshwater 
ecosystem (which includes river water, pond water) and marine ecosystem.  
 
Q2. What are the advantages of composite fish culture?  
Answer:  
An advantage of composite fish culture is that it increases the yield of fish. In a composite fish 
culture, five or six different species are grown together in a single fish pond. Fishes with 
different food habitats are chosen so that they do not compete for food among themselves. 
Also, this ensur es a complete utilization of food resources in the pond. As a result, the survival 
rate of fish increases and their yield also increases.  
 
Q1. What are the desirable characters of bee varieties suitable for honey production?  
Answer:  
Bee varieties having t he following desirable characters are suitable for honey production:  
(i) They should yield high quantity of honey.  
(ii) They should not sting much.  
(iii) They should stay in the beehive for long durations.  
(iv) They should breed very well.  
 
Q2. What is pas turage and how is it related to honey production?  
Answer:  
Pasturage is the availability of flowers from which bees collect nectar and pollen. It is related 
to the production of honey as it determines the taste and quantity of honey.  
 
EXERCISE  QUESTIONS P AGE NO. 12  
 
Q1. Explain any one method of crop production which ensures high yield.  
Answer:  
Crop rotationis one of the methods of crop production that ensures high yield. It is the method 
of growing two or more varieties of crops on the same land in seque ntial seasons. A crop 
utilises some particular nutrients in larger quantities from the soil. Then, if the same crop is 
grown in subsequent seasons those nutrients will get depleted in the soil. Therefore, crops 
having different nutrient requirements are ro tated. For example, legumes which have nitrogen -
fixing bacteria in their root nodules supply the soil with nitrogen. Therefore, these legumes are 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 200 - 
 rotated with nitrogen requiring cereals such as wheat and maize. This method reduces the need 
of fertilizers, thereby increasing the overall yield of crops.  
 
Q2. Why are manure and fertilizers used in fields?  
Answer:  
Manures and fertilizers are used in fields to enrich the soil with the required nutrients. Manure 
helps in enriching the soil with organic matter an d nutrients. This improves the fertility and 
structure of the soil. On the other hand, fertilizers ensure a healthy growth and development in 
plants. They are a good source of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. To get an optimum 
yield, it is instructed t o use a balanced combination of manures and fertilizers in the soil.  
 
Q3. What are the advantages of inter -cropping and crop rotation?  
Answer:  
Inter -cropping and crop rotation both play an important role in increasing the yield of crops. 
Inter -cropping he lps in preventing pests and diseases to spread throughout the field. It also 
increases soil fertility, whereas crop rotation prevents soil depletion, increases soil fertility, a nd 
reduces soil erosion. Both these methods reduce the need for fertilizers. It  also helps in 
controlling weeds and controls the growth of pathogens and pests in crops.  
 
Q4. What is genetic manipulation? How is it useful in agricultural practices?  
Answer:  
Genetic manipulationis a process where the gene for a particular character is introduced inside 
the chromosome of a cell. When the gene for a particular character is introduced in a plant cell, 
a transgenic plant is produced. These transgenic plants exhibit characters governed by the 
newly introduced gene.  
 
For example, let us assum e there is a wild plant that produces small fruits. If the gene 
responsible for a larger fruit size is introduced in this plant, this plant becomes transgenic, and 
starts producing larger fruits. Similarly, genes for higher yield, disease resistance, etc. can be 
introduced in any desired plant.  
 
Therefore, gene manipulation plays an important role in agricultural practices. It helps in 
improving crop variety. It ensures food security and insect resistant crops. It also improves the 
quality and yield of cro ps. 
 
Q5. How do storage grain losses occur?  
Answer:  
There are various biotic and abiotic factors that act on stored grains and result in degradation, 
poor germinability, discolouration, etc. Biotic factors include insects or pests that cause direct 
damage  by feeding on seeds. They also deteriorate and contaminate the grain, making it unfit 
for further consumption. Abiotic factors such as temperature, light, moisture, etc., also affect 
the seed. They decrease the germinating ability of the seeds and make th em unfit for future use 
by farmers. Unpredictable occurrence of natural calamities such as droughts and floods also 
causes destruction of crops.  
 
Q6. How do good animal husbandry practices benefit farmers?  
Answer:  
Cattle farming is one of the methods of a nimal husbandry that is most beneficial for farmers. 
Using this method, better breeds of draught animals can be produced. Such draught animals are 
engaged in agricultural fields for labour work such as carting, irrigation, tilling, etc.  
 
 
 
Prepared by: M. S. KumarSwamy, TG T(Maths)                 Page - 201 - 
 Q7. What are the  benefits of cattle farming?  
Answer:  
Benefits of cattle farming:  
(i) Good quality and quantity of milk can be produced.  
(ii) Draught labour animals can be produced for agricultural work.  
(iii) New variety that are resistant to diseases can be produced by  crossing two varieties with 
the desired traits.  
 
Q8. For increasing production, what is common in poultry, fisheries and bee -keeping?  
Answer:  
The common factor for increasing production in poultry, fisheries, and bee keeping is the 
proper management tech niques that are to be followed. Regular cleaning of farms is of utmost 
importance. Maintenance of temperature and prevention and cure of diseases is also required to 
increase the number of animals.  
 
Q9. How do you differentiate between capture fishing, mar iculture and aquaculture?  
Answer:  
Capture fishing: It is the method of obtaining fishes from natural resources.   
Mariculture: It is the culture of marine fishes for commercial use.   
Aquaculture: It involves the production of aquatic animals that are of hi gh economic value 
such as prawns, lobsters, fishes, crabs, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
